Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/canada-reports-first-human-case-h3n2v-influenza-45405/>On 16 Dec 2016, the WHO was notified of a confirmed human case of influenza A(H3N2) variant virus in Canada. The case developed respiratory infection symptoms on 24 Oct 2016, was hospitalized on 8 Nov 2016 with the diagnosis of pneumonia, and has recovered, according to the Influenza at the Human-Animal Interface Report. The exact location in Canada was not listed in the report.The case has confirmed exposure to ill swine on a farm. Animal health and epidemiological investigations are ongoing.Partial sequence analysis of all 8 gene segments of the virus isolated from the case indicates they are closely related to influenza A(H3N2) swine influenza viruses currently circulating in swine in North America.This is the 1st human case of A/Indiana/08/2011-like H3N2v influenza virus infection reported to WHO from Canada. Human infection with influenza A(H3N2)v viruses detected elsewhere have typically resulted in mild disease, although some have been hospitalized and at least 1 A(H3N2)v associated death has been reported.Influenza A(H1N2) and A(H3N2) viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Depending on geographic location, the genetic characteristics of these viruses differ.Most human cases are exposed to the swine influenza viruses through contact with infected swine or contaminated environments. Human infection tends to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease and 1 fatal case has been reported. Since these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations, further human cases can be expected.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs are called ""variant"" viruses when they are found in people. Influenza A H3N2 variant viruses (also known as ""H3N2v"" viruses) with the matrix (M) gene from the 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus were 1st detected in humans in July 2011.The viruses were 1st identified in U.S. pigs in 2010 and sporadic infections with H3N2v have continued to be detected since that time. Infections with H3N2v have mostly been associated with prolonged exposure to pigs at agricultural fairs. Limited human-to-human spread of this virus has been detected in the past as well, but no sustained or community spread of H3N2v has been identified at this time. It is possible that sporadic infections and even localized outbreaks among people with this virus will continue to occur.The above report from Canada concerns the 1st human case of A/H3N2v, however epidemiological information is still incomplete. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12>.]
