Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/southern-california-measles-outbreak-unvaccinated-14307/>An outbreak in the Los Angeles area of Southern California has now spread to Santa Barbara County, and health officials say most were unvaccinated. The Santa Barbara County Public Health Department is investigating exposures to a confirmed measles patient. The one confirmed case in Santa Barbara County is linked to the measles outbreak in Los Angeles that currently involves 11 patients. Of the 12 measles cases now involved in the Los Angeles outbreak, only one has provided documentation of vaccination.The exposures in Santa Barbara occurred at Goleta Valley Cottage Hospital on Tue 27 Dec [2016] between 7:24 p.m. and 10:16 p.m. There were no other exposures. All exposed healthcare workers, patients, and visitors have already been contacted, and appropriate measures are being taken to protect their health and the community. Cottage Health was able to quickly verify that all exposed healthcare workers were fully vaccinated against the measles virus.""Measles is a highly contagious viral disease that spreads from person to person through coughing or sneezing,"" said Jeffrey Gunzenhauser, MD, MPH, Interim Health Officer for Los Angeles County. ""To protect individual health and to prevent the spread of measles to others, we urge residents who are not immunized to get the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine as soon as possible. Two doses of MMR vaccine are highly effective in preventing measles and are the best way to protect against disease.""Measles can spread quickly to those who are not immune. Common signs and symptoms include fever, runny nose, cough, and a rash all over the body. In some persons, measles can cause serious illness such as pneumonia, encephalitis, or even death. The incubation period for developing measles is up to 21 days after exposure to someone else who has the disease.Measles is a serious disease and can cause encephalitis, pneumonia, and even death. The outcomes are particularly serious for young children, pregnant women, and those with weakened immune systems. In the decade before 1963, when a vaccine became available, it is estimated that 3-4 million people in the US were infected annually. Each year, an estimated 400 to 500 people died, 48 000 were hospitalized, and 4000 suffered encephalitis (swelling of the brain) from measles.Individuals who are unsure of their vaccination status should check with their doctor to determine whether they need to receive the vaccine. If you are ill, you should 1st contact your doctor by phone before going to their office so measures can be taken to prevent possible spread to others.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This spread of measles from a single case demonstrates the contagious nature of this virus. Measles can be prevented with MMR [measles, mumps, rubella] vaccine. CDC recommends children get 2 doses of MMR vaccine, starting with the 1st dose at 12-15 months of age, and the 2nd dose at 4-6 years of age. Teens and adults should also be up to date on their MMR vaccination. The MMR vaccine is very safe and effective. Two doses of MMR vaccine are about 97 percent effective at preventing measles; one dose is about 93 percent effective.A HealthMap/ProMED map showing the location of California in the US can be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>. - Mod.LK]******[2] Sudan (South Kordofan)Date: Mon 2 Jan 2017Source: Radio Tamazuj [edited]<https://radiotamazuj.org/en/article/over-20-children-die-measles-nuba-mountains-official>More than 20 children died of measles, and dozens of others contracted the disease from November until December [2016] in areas under control of SPLA-North [Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army] in the Nuba Mountain region, a rebel official said.SPLM-North and the Sudanese government have been fighting each other since 2011.Tutu Mustafa, Secretary of Health in the Nuba Mountains region, told Radio Tamazuj yesterday [1 Jan 2017] that the health situation in the SPLA-North controlled areas is deteriorating.Mustafa pointed out that they recorded about 100 cases of measles and that more than 20 children among the cases died from November until December [2016].""We have cases of measles these days. All these cases are among children less than 5 years; over 100 cases were recorded from November until December, and about 20 children died,"" he said.Mustafa attributed the problem to poor health conditions due to lack of vaccination of children since the outbreak of war in 2011. He called on the international community to put pressure on the Khartoum government to allow vaccination of children in the Blue Nile and South Kordofan regions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[With the exception of a fragile peace established by negotiations between southern Sudanese insurgents (the Anya Nya) and the Sudan government at Addis Ababa in 1972, and lasting until the resumption of the conflict in 1983, southern Sudan has been a battlefield. The north-south distinction and the hostility between the 2 regions of Sudan are grounded in religious conflict as well as a conflict between peoples of differing culture and language. The language and culture of the north are based on Arabic and the Islamic faith, whereas the south has its own diverse, mostly non-Arabic languages and cultures, with few exceptions non-Muslim, and its religious character was indigenous (traditional or Christian).The origins of the civil war in the south date back to the 1950s <https://fas.org/irp/world/para/spla.htm>.It is unfortunate when war spills over to impact the health of children, but it always does. A report was published in September 2016: WHO and partners battle multiple disease outbreaks in South Sudan, which stated:""Infectious diseases continue to pose a major public health threat in South Sudan. Adding to the chronic burden of disease, regular outbreaks further threaten people's health. ...-more""Vaccination best protection against measles----------------------------------------Since the beginning of 2016, more than 1600 measles cases, including at least 19 deaths, have been reported countrywide. WHO has confirmed and responded to measles outbreaks in 12 counties. Since the fighting escalated in mid-2016, around 182 000 children have been vaccinated against measles. A follow-up campaign is planned for October 2016. Ensuring the majority of children receive vaccination is the best protection against this highly contagious disease.Disease detection important for fast response--------------------------------------Most of these infectious diseases have been controlled or eradicated from most parts of Africa but are still causing epidemics in South Sudan due to poor socio-economic conditions. When countries are struck by conflict or natural disasters, exacerbated by weak health systems, overcrowding and population displacement, they are most vulnerable to infectious disease outbreaks.Adding to the challenge is the weakness of disease surveillance systems, making it hard to measure the true scope of the problem, or to allow for the early detection of outbreaks and appropriate response.WHO supports the early warning alert and response system (EWARS), a network of static and mobile partner-supported reporting sites, to enhance detection of disease outbreaks in populations of humanitarian concern. There are now 58 EWARS reporting sites in South Sudan, and these sites will continue to be expanded to complement the existing surveillance system in areas affected by the crisis.WHO support to detect and control outbreaks-------------------------------------------Despite the fragile security situation and challenging conditions to deliver health services, WHO, together with partners, is providing vital support for the people of South Sudan.WHO trains rapid response teams to investigate and respond to emerging outbreaks and has prepositioned outbreak investigation and response kits for several infectious diseases, as well as for medical complications of severe acute malnutrition (SAM), at 9 state hubs. These supplies have been used to promptly respond to emerging outbreaks and humanitarian emergencies countrywide.WHO continues to support the nationwide specimen referral system for timely confirmation of disease outbreaks. Working with the state rapid response teams, United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) and partners, WHO facilitates and supports the shipment of biological samples to the national public health laboratory and international collaborating laboratories for confirmatory testing. WHO continues to support the national public health laboratory to test samples of cholera, measles and other priority diseases, to enable a fast response that will ultimately save lives.""Excerpted from <http://www.who.int/features/2016/south-sudan-multiple-disease-outbreaks/en/>.Maps of Sudan can be seen at <http://bit.ly/2iB4MTv>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/96>.]
