Govt. of Hong Kong SAR Press Release [edited]<http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201701/05/P2017010501042.htm>The Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health is today (5 Jan 2015) investigating an imported human case of avian influenza A(H7N9) in Hong Kong, and again urged the public to maintain strict personal, food and environmental hygiene both locally and during travel.The male patient, aged 62 with underlying illnesses, departed Hong Kong since 15 Dec 2016 and travelled to Zengcheng, Guangzhou. He has developed fever, cough and shortness of breath since 1 Jan 2017. He was admitted to a hospital for treatment in Dongguan during 2-3 Jan 2017. The patient discharged himself against medical advice on 3 Jan 2017 and returned to Hong Kong via Lo Wu on the same day. He attended the Accident and Emergency Department of Yan Chai Hospital yesterday (4 Jan 2017) and was admitted for treatment on the same day. His condition deteriorated today and he has been transferred to the intensive care unit for further management. The patient is now in critical condition.His endotracheal aspirate and nasopharyngeal aspirate specimen were confirmed to be positive for influenza A(H7N9) virus by the CHP's Public Health Laboratory Services Branch tonight [5 Jan 2017]. The patient denied recent exposure to poultry or wet markets.His close contacts have remained asymptomatic so far and have been put under medical surveillance. Tracing of his other contacts in Hong Kong is underway.""The case has been reported to Guangdong and Macau health authorities. We are communicating with the Mainland authority to follow up the patient's exposure and movements in the Mainland. Based on information available thus far, it is classified as an imported case. Epidemiological investigations are ongoing,"" a spokesman for the CHP said. ""Locally, 3 confirmed human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) were recorded in the past 3 weeks. The activity of avian influenza is expected to increase in winter based on its seasonal pattern. Letters to doctors, hospitals, schools and institutions will be issued to alert them to the latest situation,"" a spokesman for the CHP added.Meanwhile, the CHP is closely monitoring 14 additional human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) in Guangdong. According to the Health and Family Planning Commission of Guangdong Province's announcement today [5 Jan 2017], the distribution of the additional cases over the last month are as follows: Guangzhou (3), Jiangmen (3), Jieyang (2), Shenzhen (2), Zhaoqing (2), Dongguan (1) and Zhongshan (1).""The public should avoid touching birds, poultry or their droppings and visiting poultry markets or farms during travel, particularly in the upcoming Lunar New Year holidays. If feeling unwell, such as having fever or cough, wear a mask, and seek medical advice at once. Travellers returning from affected areas should consult doctors promptly if symptoms develop, and let them know their travel history,"" the spokesman said.The CHP's Port Health Office conducts health surveillance measures at all boundary control points. Thermal imaging systems are in place for body temperature checks on inbound travellers. Suspected cases will be immediately referred to public hospitals for follow-up.The display of posters and broadcasting of health messages in departure and arrival halls as health education for travellers is underway. The travel industry and other stakeholders are regularly updated on the latest information.The public should maintain strict personal, hand, food and environmental hygiene and take heed of the advice below while handling poultry: - Avoid touching poultry, birds, animals or their droppings;- When buying live chickens, do not touch them and their droppings. Do not blow at their bottoms. Wash eggs with detergent if soiled with faecal matter and cook and consume them immediately. Always wash hands thoroughly with soap and water after handling chickens and eggs;- Eggs should be cooked well until the white and yolk become firm. Do not eat raw eggs or dip cooked food into any sauce with raw eggs. Poultry should be cooked thoroughly. If there is pinkish juice running from the cooked poultry or the middle part of its bone is still red, the poultry should be cooked again until fully done;- Wash hands frequently, especially before touching the mouth, nose or eyes, before handling food or eating, and after going to the toilet, touching public installations or equipment such as escalator handrails, elevator control panels or door knobs, or when hands are dirtied by respiratory secretions after coughing or sneezing; and- Wear a mask if fever or respiratory symptoms develop, when going to a hospital or clinic, or while taking care of patients with fever or respiratory symptoms.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This is the 3rd imported case from mainland China in 3 weeks, and this case has now died. - Mod.UBA]******[2] GuangdongDate: 6 Jan 2017Source: China Daily [edited]<http://www.ecns.cn/2017/01-06/240390.shtml>The World Health Organization has warned that it expects to see more sporadic cases of human bird flu in China, and potentially abroad, and said public vigilance is needed to contain the virus.The alert comes as authorities in Zhongshan, Guangdong province confirmed 2 new cases of H7N9 avian flu on Wednesday [4 Jan 2017]. Both patients were in critical condition after being exposed at live poultry markets.""Given the increasing number of human cases and constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, continued vigilance and close monitoring are needed to detect infections,"" the WHO China Office said in a statement.Winter is the peak season in China for zoonotic flu -- strains that can pass from animal to human -- and so far, several cases of H7N9 have been reported in regions including Shanghai and Fujian and Anhui provinces. Two people died in Anhui in December 2016.Most of the recent cases involved exposure to infected live poultry or contaminated environments, such as live poultry markets, according to the WHO.""The information to date does not support sustained human-to-human transmission, although limited human-to-human transmission cannot be excluded,"" it said. ""We expect to continue to see a number of sporadic cases.""China has culled more than 170 000 chickens in 4 provinces since October 2016 and closed some live poultry markets, Reuters reported.H7N9 was 1st reported in China in spring 2013. According to WHO data, infections were detected in 2 travelers arriving in Canada from China in 2015 and one in Malaysia in 2014.""It's possible similar cases will be detected in other countries among travelers from affected areas, although community-level spread in other countries is unlikely,"" the statement said, adding that the WHO ""does not advise special screening at points of entry"" regarding avian flu, ""nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions.""He Xiong, deputy director of the Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said he sees no possibility that recent cases will spark an epidemic, since there is no evidence the flu can be transmitted between humans.The WHO advised: ""It's important the general public continue to take precautionary measures to reduce exposure to avian influenza viruses from infected poultry."" Such measures include avoiding direct contact with live poultry and adopting good hygiene practices while handling, slaughtering and preparing poultry for consumption.Mao Qun'an, a spokesman for the National Health and Family Planning Commission, said in December 2016 that China ""is well prepared to contain outbreaks.""[Byline: Feng Shuang]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] ShandongDate: 5 Jan 2017Source: Fox News [edited]<http://www.foxnews.com/health/2017/01/05/china-confirms-latest-human-death-from-h7n9-bird-flu.html>A man in China's eastern province of Shandong has become at least the 4th person to die this winter [2016-17] from H7N9 bird flu, state media said on Thursday [5 Jan 2017], while officials in southern Guangdong confirmed 14 cases of the virus in December 2016.Regional fears of a major bird flu outbreak have been sparked by a record outbreak of avian influenza in poultry in South Korea, as well as infections in birds in Japan.The 77-year-old man diagnosed in Shandong's Rizhao city on Tuesday [3 Jan 2017] died later the same day, the official Xinhua news agency said.Guangdong authorities said the December 2016 bird flu cases were scattered around the province, according to the state-run China News Service. Dozens of human cases have been confirmed around China this winter [2016-17].Bird flu is most likely to strike in winter and spring. In recent years, farmers have stepped up cleaning regimes, animal detention techniques, and built roofs to cover hen pens in their efforts to prevent the disease.Widespread infection can lead to severe risks and huge financial losses for farmers. China's last major outbreak killed 36 people and caused more than USD 6 billion in losses for the agricultural sector.The H7N9 strain does not seem to transmit easily among people, and sustained human-to-human infection has not been reported, the World Health Organization says. The danger is that any such virus mutates and acquires genetic changes that could boost its pandemic potential.Normal seasonal flu, while not serious for most people, still costs hundreds of thousands of lives every year.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] HunanDate: Sat 7 Jan 2017Source: Sputnik International [edited]<https://sputniknews.com/asia/201701071049361505-china-bird-flu/>The 35-year-old man from the city of Zhuzhou tested positive for H7N9 avian influenza, [Hunan's] center for disease control and prevention said. The patient is in critical condition. The news comes a day after the 2nd case of bird flu infection in a week had been registered in China's eastern Jiangxi province.Also on Friday [6 Jan 2017], a 62-year-old man died from bird flu in Hong Kong. Earlier in the week, 2 new infection cases were registered in the southeastern Chinese city of Zhongshan in the Guangdong province. The 1st case of a human contracting avian influenza virus of the H7N9 strain was registered in China in March 2013.China has imposed bans on poultry imports from affected countries. Curbs are already in place against some 60 nations, including Japan and South Korea.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There is low risk of human-to-human transmission, but continuing reports of primary human cases are a serious concern for public health. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>.]
