The Advertiser, Australian Associated Press report [edited]<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/breaking-news/risks-from-deadly-soil-bacteria-rise-in-nt/news-story/e564c1fb57c82911e04ec5b1400a1680>Getting stuck in the mud has never been so dangerous in the Top End, as monsoons boost the risk of a deadly bacterium found in soil. There have been 17 cases of melioidosis in the Northern Territory since October 2016, and 1 person has already died. That is higher than usual, and authorities are warning that contact with mud, puddles and wind-blown soil during heavy rain increases the chance of exposure to the tropical disease.""The bacterium can invade the body through cuts and sores but it can also be breathed in if it's stirred up by the wind,"" Centre for Disease Control director Dr Vicki Krause said. The highly infectious illness can lead to severe pneumonia and blood infection and has a mortality rate of 15 percent, Dr Krause said. ""We usually see symptoms of fever, coughing and breathing difficulties but the symptoms of melioidosis can vary greatly,"" she said.People usually get sick 1 to 21 days after coming into contact with the bacterium. The onset of symptoms can be slow and may include signs like weight loss or sores that don't heal.The soil-borne disease lies dormant deep in the ground for most of the year, but comes to the surface during the wet season. Those especially at risk of catching melioidosis include gardeners who come into close contact with soil and people with compromised immune systems. People at risk should stay indoors in windy and rainy conditions, Dr Krause said. That includes those suffering from chronic alcoholism, diabetes, cancer or who are taking steroids. ""Laborers and other people who work with soil should always wear protective clothing, as healthy people can get the disease,"" Dr Krause said.How to avoid melioidosis:-Stay indoors during heavy wind or rain-Wear waterproof footwear and gloves around mud and areas of pooled water-Wear masks when using high pressure hoses outside-Avoid binge drinking.[Byline: Lucy Hughes Jones]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Most of the reports of melioidosis from Australia originate in the Northern Territory; however, the disease is also endemic in Queensland, which is east of the Northern Territory. The disease usually occurs during the rainy season and may be accentuated by extreme flooding from rain and also from tsunamis, as occurred in 2005 in Thailand. A few cases were diagnosed after survivors returned to their home country of Finland._Burkholderia pseudomallei_ exists as an environmental saprophyte living in soil and surface water in endemic areas (South East Asia and northern, tropical Australia), particularly in rice paddies. In endemic countries, the organism exists primarily in focal areas and is not equally distributed throughout the landscape. Sporadic cases have been reported to have been acquired in parts of Africa and the Americas. The organism may exist in a viable, non-cultivable state in the environment, interacting with other organisms, particularly protozoa, which might explain its adaptation to an intracellular niche. Two outbreaks in Australia have also implicated potable water supplies rather than surface water as a potential source of the infection.Melioidosis is a disease of the rainy season in the endemic areas. It mainly affects people who have direct contact with soil and water. Many have an underlying predisposing condition such as diabetes (commonest risk factor), renal disease, cirrhosis, thalassemia, alcohol dependence, immunosuppressive therapy, chronic obstructive lung disease, cystic fibrosis, and excess kava consumption. Kava is an herbal member of the pepper family that can be associated with chronic liver disease.Melioidosis may present at any age, but peaks in the 4th and 5th decades of life, affecting men more than women. In addition, although severe fulminating infection can and does occur in healthy individuals, severe disease and fatalities are much less common in those without risk factors.The most commonly recognized presentation of melioidosis is pneumonia, associated with high fever, significant muscle aches, chest pain, and -- although the cough can be nonproductive -- respiratory secretions can be purulent, significant in quantity, and associated with on-and-off bright, red blood. The lung infection can be rapidly fatal -- with bacteremia and shock -- or somewhat more indolent.Acute melioidosis septicemia is the most severe complication of the infection. It presents as a typical sepsis syndrome with hypotension, high cardiac output, and low systemic vascular resistance. In many cases, a primary focus in the soft tissues or lung can be found. The syndrome, usually in patients with risk factor comorbidities, is characteristically associated with multiple abscesses involving the cutaneous tissues, the lung, the liver, and spleen, and a very high mortality rate of 80 to 95 percent. With prompt optimal therapy, the case fatality rate can be decreased to 40 to 50 percent.The melioidosis bacillus is intrinsically insensitive to many antimicrobials. It should be noted that bioterrorism strains may be engineered to be even more resistant. _B. pseudomallei_ is usually inhibited by tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (SXT), antipseudomonal penicillins, carbapenems, ceftazidime, and amoxicillin/clavulanate or ampicillin/sulbactam. Ceftriaxone and cefotaxime have good in vitro activity but poor efficacy; and cefepime did not appear, as well, to be equivalent to ceftazidime in a mouse model. The unusual antimicrobial profile of resistance to colistin and polymyxin B and the aminoglycosides but sensitivity to amoxicillin/clavulanate is a useful tool to consider in treatment of infection with the organism.The randomized and quasi-randomized trials comparing melioidosis treatment have been reviewed, and it was found that the formerly standard therapy of chloramphenicol, doxycycline, and SXT combination had a higher mortality rate than therapy with ceftazidime, imipenem/cilastatin, or amoxicillin/clavulanate (or ampicillin/sulbactam). The betalactam-betalactamase inhibitor therapy, however, seemed to have a higher failure rate.Source: Tolaney P, Lutwick LI: Melioidosis. In: Lutwick LI, Lutwick SM (eds). Bioterror: the weaponization of infectious diseases. Totowa NJ: Humana Press, 2008 pp 145-58. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/292>.]
