Birmingham Mail [edited]<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/health/hacking-cough-linked-virus-gives-12423993>The hacking cough which is sweeping Birmingham has been linked to the adenovirus behind pneumonia and meningitis. The virus has led to thousands across the region suffering from a nasty cough -- and it can't be treated with antibiotics.While it is presently stumping many GPs, some experts have blamed the adenovirus -- which can infect the airways and the intestinal tract -- for the outbreak.The adenovirus is often linked to pneumonia and meningitis, according to clinical pharmacology expert Dr Ananya Mandal. She writes: ""Some persons with a poor immunity are prone to develop complications due to adenovirus infection."" Common but serious complications include lung infection or pneumonia, middle ear infection or otitis media and brain infections or meningitis."" Surgeries across the West Midlands have been inundated by people complaining of huge coughing fits.Dr Clare Gerada, former head of the Royal College of General Practitioners, described the hacking cough, which is part of the virus, as more severe than a normal cold, ""almost a type of bronchitis"". It can take up to 3 weeks to clear. Dr Anna Kuczynska, a GP in Cardiff, told Wales Online: ""Antibiotics will be of no help for most normally healthy people. 'If you see blood or are breathless with your symptoms, have lost weight or symptoms are on-going more than 3 weeks, patients should get advice.""New research claims that cough medicines bought over the counter at pharmacies work little better than a placebo. Only cough drops were proven to work, although boiled sweets would have the same throat-soothing effect, experts said.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Acute respiratory disease due to adenovirus is associated predominantly adenovirus types 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6; occasionally, 3 and 7. As with many other viral syndromes, respiratory infections are more common in spring and winter months. Approximately half of adenovirus respiratory infections do not cause symptoms.The contagiousness of adenovirus is facilitated by very high levels of viral particles (100 000-1 000 000/mL) in the sputum or oral secretions of infected adults. Additionally, adults with low immunity may be infected by the inhalation of as few as 5 virions in droplet nuclei.Fever, rhinorrhea, cough, and sore throat, usually lasting 3-5 days, are typical symptoms of adenovirus associated respiratory disease. Causes of sore throat may include pharyngitis, adenoiditis, or tonsillitis. Prolonged fevers, leukocytosis, and elevations in C reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were also noted in over half of cases, suggesting potential for confusion of this viral syndrome with bacterial infections. Lower respiratory tract infections, including tracheobronchitis, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia, may mimic respiratory syncytial virus infection or influenza (<http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/211738-clinical>).Laboratory diagnosis of adenovirus infection rarely affects management. During the acute illness, virus can be isolated from respiratory and ocular secretions and frequently from stool and urine. A 4-fold rise in the serum antibody titer indicates recent adenoviral infection (<http://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/infectious-diseases/respiratory-viruses/adenovirus-infections>).Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Ribavirin and cidofovir have been used in immunocompromised patients; results have been varied.To minimize transmission, heath care practitioners should change gloves and wash hands after examining infected patients, sterilize instruments adequately, and avoid using ophthalmologic instruments in multiple patients.Vaccines containing live adenovirus types 4 and 7, given orally in an enteric-coated capsule, can reduce lower respiratory disease but are not widely available. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/919>.]
