WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/09-january-2017-plague-mdg/en/>Plague å  Madagascar-------------------On 6 Dec 2016, the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Madagascar alerted WHO of a suspected plague outbreak in Befotaka district, Atsimo Atsinanana region in the southeastern part of the country. The district is outside the area known to be endemic in Madagascar. No plague cases have been reported in this area since 1950.As of 27 Dec 2016, 62 cases (6 confirmed, 5 probable, 51 suspected) including 26 deaths (case fatality rate of 42 percent) have been reported in 2 adjacent districts in 2 neighboring regions of the country. As many as 28 cases, including 10 deaths, have been reported from Befotaka District in Atsimo-Atsinanana Region and 34 cases, including 16 deaths, have been reported from Iakora district in Ihorombe Region. Of the 11 samples tested, 5 were positive for plague on rapid diagnostic test and 6 are now confirmed at Institut Pasteur laboratory. Of the total reported cases, 5 are classified as pneumonic plague cases and the remaining as bubonic plague.Retrospective investigations carried out in those 2 districts showed that it is possible that the outbreak might have started in mid-August 2016. The investigation in neighbouring villages is still ongoing. On 29 Dec 2016, an investigation carried out within 25 km [approx. 15.5 mi] of the initial foci in Befotaka district has reported 3 deaths and is being investigated further for possible linkage to the outbreak. The affected zone is located in a very remote, hard to reach and highly insecure area (classified as red zone due to local banditry). Despite arrangements made with the local authorities, insecurity slows down the investigations and response activities. In addition, a helicopter has been made available but its use has been limited due to bad weather and financial limitations.Public Health Response----------------------On 6 Dec 2016, a 15 member multidisciplinary team from MoH, Institute Pasteur including public health professional, epidemiologist, entomologist and laboratory professional visited the affected area for epidemiological investigation and response activities. Key response activities already implemented include:- Epidemiological investigations including active case finding and rapid diagnostic testing- Training of community health workers on community-based surveillance and early detection of cases- Clinical management of suspected cases- Identification, follow up and chemoprophylaxis of contacts- Vector and reservoir control through the use of Kartman boxes- Sensitization of the population- Strengthening the community based surveillance- Free treatment of other diagnosed disease such as malaria- Strengthening early detection in neighboring districts- Laboratory confirmationWHO Risk Assessment-------------------Based on the available information to date, the risk of international spread appears unlikely, especially as it is occurring in a very remote area. However, the difficulty to reach the affected area hampered prompt investigation and therefore at this stage the real magnitude of the outbreak is still to be defined, and the risk of further spread in the area and sustained transmission cannot be formally ruled out. WHO continues supporting the ongoing investigation and response activities.WHO Advice----------Further ecological investigations will be needed to understand the occurrence of a plague outbreak in an area which has not reported any cases of plague since 1950 in order to adapt long term surveillance and control measures.The outbreak impacts rural communities which have already suffered from remoteness and inadequate access to health services. Staff from the MoH is supported by the Pasteur Institute of Madagascar, who are all experienced on control measures. However, local conditions make their implementation complex.Due to the remoteness of the affected area and the conditions for getting infected by the disease, the current outbreak does not represent a significant risk for travelers.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Plague is caused by the _Yersinia pestis_ bacillus, carried by rat fleas. At the start of the rainy season, currently, rats flee the sewers of Madagascar in massive numbers and take refuge in people's cottages. Care must be taken in any rodent eradication program to ensure that a flea-killing compound is part of the plan. Just as in a natural rodent die-off from _Y. pestis_, the fleas will seek alternate hosts, that is, humans.It is interesting that no cases had been reported from this remote area in almost 70 years. The areas remoteness is likely to be partly responsible for this, rather than no sporadic cases occurring.The following paragraph is from Chanteau S, Ratsifasoamanana L, Rasoamanana B, et al: Plague, a reemerging disease in Madagascar. Emerg Infect Dis. 1998;4(1):101-4, PMID: 9452403 (available at, <http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/4/1/98-0114_article.htm>).""Between 1930 and 1990, bubonic plague had ""virtually disappeared"" on the island due to efficient pest-control and good health management. However since 1990, an annual 200 cases are being reported and bubonic plague takes on epidemic form, especially in the port of Mahajanga, each year. In the capital city of Antananarivo, more cases are also being notified each year since 1990. Madagascar (pop. 13 million) has accounted for 45 percent of all the cases of plague in Africa.""Fatalities related to plague usually are caused by spread of the organism from the bubo (the very painful infected lymph node which drains the area where the flea bite occurred) to the bloodstream. The bacteremia can cause a coagulopathy, producing the purpura seen in the ""black plague"" and also spread to the lungs causing a hemorrhagic pneumonia. It is the pneumonia that can facilitate person-to-person transmission.Madagascar was the location of the isolation of multi-antimicrobial resistant _Y. pestis_ in 1995 (Galimand M, Guiyoule A, Gerbaud G, et al: Multidrug resistance in _Yersinia pestis_ mediated by a transferable plasmid. N Engl J Med. 1997;337(10):677-80, PMID: 9278464; available at, <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199709043371004>). The strain was resistant to chloramphenicol, streptomycin, and tetracycline but sensitive to fluoroquinolones and trimethoprim as well as other aminoglycosides. This was an ominous observation; however, it is not clear whether this naturally occurring strain has persisted or spread.The regions of Madagascar can be found on a map at: <http://www.ngw.nl/heraldrywiki/images/c/cd/Madregions.jpg>. The affected regions are in the southern part of the island nation. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/181>.]
