Times Online [edited]<http://www.timesonline.com/timestoday/first-case-of-potent-opioid-carfentanil-confirmed-in-beaver-county/article_20dd8b78-d914-11e6-8f67-0f7ce0ef5323.html>A person in the Beaver Falls area who died from a drug overdose in November (2016) tested positive on Thursday [12 Jan 2017] for carfentanil, a powerful opioid that is 100 times stronger than fentanyl and 10 000 times stronger than morphine. It is the 1st confirmed case involving the elephant tranquilizer in the county, said Beaver County Coroner David Gabauer.When using the tranquilizer on animals, zoo officials work in pairs and are completely covered in protective gear. Because people are using the highly fatal drug for recreation, Gabauer is urging all 1st responders to wear gloves and masks to protect themselves.There were several cases of heroin being laced with the drug in Ohio last year [2016], according to the Pennsylvania Department of Health.The Beaver Falls (Pennsylvania) area overdose death also may be one of the 1st cases involving carfentanil in Pennsylvania. Tiny amounts -- the size of a grain or 2 of sand -- can be potentially fatal to humans. And it doesn't necessarily need to be intentionally ingested.""If a person just gets it on their hand and accidentally touches their eye, touches their mouth, that could prove to be fatal for them,"" said Dr. Neil Capretto, medical director with Gateway Rehab. ""So we have to warn 1st responders or somebody who encounters somebody with an overdose to be extremely careful about touching drug paraphernalia.""Carfentanil is a concentrated version of fentanyl, a synthetic opioid that was the leading cause of drug overdose deaths in Beaver County over the past 2 years.Capretto said synthetics have become popular because they're produced cheaply, easily and quickly. Heroin takes time to grow from poppy plants and cultivate, so synthetics are used to supplement batches of heroin, he said. Emergency personnel have been wearing protective gear at all suspected drug overdose scenes to ensure their safety, said Bill Pasquale, operations manager at Medic Rescue. ""We don't know what we're handling or what we're involved with until items are tested,"" he said. ""That could be days if not weeks after the fact. So everyone should exercise extreme caution and treat every scene the same, using all possible protective equipment.""Family members of overdose victims are urged to not touch paraphernalia because of the drug's potency, Pasquale added. It's also questionable how effective the opioid antidote naloxone could be in cases involving carfentanil.Capretto said cases involving fentanyl often need multiple doses of naloxone and have to be administered within minutes.Gabauer said a person who overdoses on carfentanil will take 2 or 3 Narcan doses to revive the person. Paramedics only carry a few doses at a time.Heroin typically doesn't cause instantaneous unconsciousness, allowing more time to reverse an overdose should it occur. Synthetic opioids are different. ""I've had patients tell me they go totally unconscious before the needle's out of their arm,"" Capretto said. ""So the window of time you have to save that person becomes extremely small.""The Pennsylvania Department of Health issued a press release about carfentanil in September (2016). At that time, there were not any confirmed cases in the state, but there had been confirmed deaths involving the drug in Ohio. A health department spokesperson did not immediately return phone calls on Thursday [12 Jan 2017] regarding other potential cases in Pennsylvania.[Byline: Kate Malongowski]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The question on my mind is how did the individual acquire the drug? What was the source? The internet?According to the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), several warnings have been issued (<https://www.dea.gov/divisions/hq/2016/hq092216.shtml>):22 Sep 2016Contact: DEA Public Affairs(202) 307-7977DEA Issues Carfentanil Warning to Police and PublicDangerous opioid 10 000 times more potent than morphine and 100 times more potent than fentanyl.22 Sep 2016 (Washington) - DEA has issued a public warning to the public and law enforcement nationwide about the health and safety risks of carfentanil. Carfentanil is a synthetic opioid that is 10 000 times more potent than morphine and 100 times more potent than fentanyl, which itself is 50 times more potent than heroin. DEA, local law enforcement, and 1st responders have recently seen the presence of carfentanil, which has been linked to a significant number of overdose deaths in various parts of the country. Improper handling of carfentanil, as well as fentanyl and other fentanyl-related compounds, has deadly consequences.""Carfentanil is surfacing in more and more communities."" said DEA Acting Administrator Chuck Rosenberg. ""We see it on the streets, often disguised as heroin. It is crazy dangerous. Synthetics such as fentanyl and carfentanil can kill you. I hope our 1st responders -- and the public -- will read and heed our health and safety warning. These men and women have remarkably difficult jobs and we need them to be well and healthy.""Carfentanil is a Schedule II substance under the Controlled Substances Act and is used as a tranquilizing agent for elephants and other large mammals. The lethal dose range for carfentanil in humans is unknown. However, as noted, carfentanil is approximately 100 times more potent than fentanyl, which can be lethal at the 2-milligram range, depending on route of administration and other factors.Carfentanil and other fentanyl-related compounds are a serious danger to public safety, 1st responder, medical, treatment, and laboratory personnel. These substances can come in several forms, including powder, blotter paper, tablets, and spray; they can be absorbed through the skin or accidental inhalation of airborne powder. If encountered, responding personnel should do the following based on the specific situation:Exercise extreme caution. Only properly trained and outfitted law enforcement professionals should handle any substance suspected to contain fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound. If encountered, contact the appropriate officials within your agency. Be aware of any sign of exposure. Symptoms include: respiratory depression or arrest, drowsiness, disorientation, sedation, pinpoint pupils, and clammy skin. The onset of these symptoms usually occurs within minutes of exposure.Seek IMMEDIATE medical attention. Carfentanil and other fentanyl-related substances can work very quickly, so in cases of suspected exposure, it is important to call EMS immediately. If inhaled, move the victim to fresh air. If ingested and the victim is conscious, wash out the victim's eyes and mouth with cool water.Be ready to administer naloxone in the event of exposure. Naloxone is an antidote for opioid overdose. Immediately administering naloxone can reverse an overdose of carfentanil, fentanyl, or other opioids, although multiple doses of naloxone may be required. Continue to administer a dose of naloxone every 2-3 minutes until the individual is breathing on his/her own for at least 15 minutes or until EMS arrives.Remember that carfentanil can resemble powdered cocaine or heroin. If you suspect the presence of carfentanil or any synthetic opioid, do not take samples or otherwise disturb the substance, as this could lead to accidental exposure. Rather, secure the substance and follow approved transportation procedures.Carfentanil is a fentanyl-related substance not approved for use in humans. In June [2016], DEA released a Roll Call video to all law enforcement nationwide about the dangers of improperly handling fentanyl and its deadly consequences. Acting Deputy Administrator Jack Riley and 2 local police detectives from New Jersey appear on the video to urge any law enforcement personnel who come in contact with fentanyl or fentanyl compounds to take the drugs directly to a lab.""Fentanyl can kill you,"" Riley said. ""Fentanyl is being sold as heroin in virtually every corner of our country. It's produced clandestinely in Mexico, and (also) comes directly from China. It is 40 to 50 times stronger than street-level heroin. A very small amount ingested, or absorbed through your skin, can kill you.""Two Atlantic County, NJ detectives were recently exposed to a very small amount of fentanyl, and appeared on the video. Said one detective: ""I thought that was it. I thought I was dying. It felt like my body was shutting down."" Riley also admonished police to skip testing on the scene, and encouraged them to also remember potential harm to police canines during the course of duties. ""Don't field test it in your car, or on the street, or take if back to the office. Transport it directly to a laboratory, where it can be safely handled and tested."" The video can be accessed at: <http://go.usa.gov/chBgh>.The warning from the DEA is especially important as it includes animals. Pets are especially sensitive as well and could encounter the substance from the paraphernalia of an owner-user. Do not neglect signs of sudden collapse in your pets. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/240>.].................................................sb/tg/msp/dk"
