Bristol Post [edited]<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/students-kept-away-from-class-following-slapped-cheek-outbreak-at-school-near-bristol/story-30053069-detail/story.html>Slapped cheek outbreak at primary school as pupils kept away from class-----------------------------------------------------------------------Youngsters at primary school in North Somerset [England] are being kept away from class following an outbreak of the virus 'slapped cheek'. The infection, which is also known as fifth disease or erythema infectiosum, normally occurs in children between 4 and 12 years old and causes a red rash, usually on both cheeks, which makes them look like they have been slapped.A number of children at Yeo Moor Primary School in Clevedon have been kept away from lessons following outbreaks over the past few weeks and text messages warning of the outbreak have been sent to parents.The virus has affected around 10 children, most of whom are in year 1. However there have been cases amongst older children at the school.The school, at Kennaway Road, has also had 1 confirmed outbreak of scarlet fever which has been notified to North Somerset Council public health team.A school spokesman said: ""We have had around 10 cases of slapped cheek at the school which has mainly affected year 1 students.""We had 2 new cases this morning.""Texts have been sent out to parents over the last 10 days highlighting slapped cheek is circulating the school.""It is understood the virus is circulating schools right across the Bristol area.Slapped cheek is an infection caused by the parvovirus B19 virus and by the time the rash develops, it is usually no longer infectious.People normally have slapped cheek disease only once in a lifetime because the body makes antibodies during the infection which protect from future infections with this same virus.Typically, the rash looks like a bright red scald on one or both cheeks and is painless.Sometimes a more widespread faint rash appears on the body, arms, and legs.Occasionally, the rash on the face and body keeps fading and returning several times for up to 4 weeks.However, it is more common for the rash to come and go completely within a few days.The virus can affect pregnant women and people with weaker immune systems. People who fall into this category and who may have been in contact with the virus are advised to contact their GP for further advice.Complications during pregnancy------------------------------If you get slapped cheek syndrome during your first 20 weeks of pregnancy, there's an increased risk of miscarriage. If you become infected during weeks 9 to 20 of your pregnancy, there's also a small risk that the baby will develop foetal hydrops. This is a serious condition, where a build-up of fluid develops in the baby's body, causing complications such as heart failure and anaemia. Some babies can recover from foetal hydrops; however, the condition can be fatal.There's no evidence that having slapped cheek syndrome during pregnancy causes birth defects or development problems later in childhood.When to get advice------------------See your GP or midwife as soon as possible if you're pregnant and you think you've come into contact with slapped cheek syndrome. You should do this whether you develop a rash or not. There's no routine screening test for slapped cheek syndrome in pregnancy.Your GP will do a blood test. If you test positive for the virus in your first 20 weeks of pregnancy, you will be offered ultrasound scans throughout your pregnancy to monitor your baby. If your baby develops foetal hydrops, they may need a blood transfusion while still in the womb.[Byline: H Pickstock]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Fifth disease is a mild rash illness caused by parvovirus B19. This disease, also called erythema infectiosum, got its name because it was fifth in a list of historical classifications of common skin rash illnesses in children. It is more common in children than adults. A person usually gets sick with fifth disease within 4 to 14 days after getting infected with parvovirus B19.Signs & Symptoms--------------------The first symptoms of fifth disease are usually mild and may include fever, runny nose, and headache. Then you can get a rash on your face and body. After several days, you may get a red rash on your face called ""slapped cheek"" rash. This rash is the most recognized feature of fifth disease. It is more common in children than adults.Some people may get a 2nd rash a few days later on their chest, back, buttocks, or arms and legs. The rash may be itchy, especially on the soles of the feet. It can vary in intensity and usually goes away in 7 to 10 days, but it can come and go for several weeks. As it starts to go away, it may look lacy.People with fifth disease can also develop pain and swelling in their joints (polyarthropathy syndrome). This is more common in adults, especially women. Some adults with fifth disease may only have painful joints, usually in the hands, feet, or knees, and no other symptoms. The joint pain usually lasts 1 to 3 weeks, but it can last for months or longer. It usually goes away without any long-term problems.Complications-------------Fifth disease is usually mild for children and adults who are otherwise healthy. But for some people fifth disease cause serious health complications.People with weakened immune systems caused by leukemia, cancer, organ transplants, or HIV infection are at risk for serious complications from fifth disease. It can cause chronic anemia that requires medical treatment.Transmission------------Parvovirus B19 spreads through respiratory secretions (such as saliva, sputum, or nasal mucus) when an infected person coughs or sneezes. You are most contagious when it seems like you have ""just a cold"" and before you get the rash or joint pain and swelling. After you get the rash you are not likely to be contagious, so then it is usually safe for you or your child to go back to work or school.People with fifth disease who have weakened immune systems may be contagious for a longer amount of time.Parvovirus B19 can also spread through blood or blood products. A pregnant woman who is infected with parvovirus B19 can pass the virus to her baby.Once you recover from fifth disease, you develop immunity that generally protects you from parvovirus B19 infection in the future.Diagnosis---------Healthcare providers can often diagnose fifth disease just by seeing ""slapped cheek"" rash on a patient's face. A blood test can also be done to determine if you are susceptible or immune to parvovirus B19 infection or if you were recently infected. The blood test may be particularly helpful for pregnant women who may have been exposed to parvovirus B19 and are suspected to have fifth disease.Prevention & Treatment----------------------There is no vaccine or medicine that can prevent parvovirus B19 infection. You can reduce your chance of being infected or infecting others by washing your hands often with soap and water, covering your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze, not touching your eyes, nose, or mouth, avoiding close contact with people who are sick, staying home when you are sick. After you get the rash, you are probably not contagious. So it is usually then safe for you to go back to work or for your child to return to school or a child care center.Healthcare providers who are pregnant should know about potential risks to their baby and discuss this with their doctor.All healthcare providers and patients should follow strict infection control practices to prevent parvovirus B19 from spreading. For information about handwashing, see CDC's Clean Hands Save Lives! [<https://www.cdc.gov/handwashing/>]Fifth disease is usually mild and will go away on its own. Children and adults who are otherwise healthy usually recover completely. Treatment usually involves relieving symptoms, such as fever, itching, and joint pain and swelling.People who have complications from fifth disease should see their healthcare provider for medical treatment.<https://www.cdc.gov/parvovirusb19/fifth-disease.html> [edited] A map of the United Kingdom can be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>. - Mod.LK]
