Center for Diseases Control, Taiwan [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov.tw/english/info.aspx?treeid=bc2d4e89b154059b&nowtreeid=ee0a2987cfba3222&tid=77012EFE761AD7DC>On 11 Jan 2017, the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (Taiwan CDC) announced one new case of hantavirus hemorrhagic fever.As the Chinese New Year holiday is fast approaching, the public is reminded to check inside and outside the house for gaps or holes that allow rodents to enter the home and remove food sources as well as items that provide shelter for rodents. Restaurants, hotels, eateries, markets, food factories and households are urged to maintain good environmental hygiene and carry out de-ratting measures when necessary in order to prevent outbreaks from occurring.The case is a 57 year old man who resides in southern Taiwan and runs a butcher shop. The case's primary areas of daily activities include places around his residence and work place. He had not recently traveled during the incubation period. On 23 Dec 2016, he sought medical attention at a clinic after developing fever, muscle ache and chills. On 25 Dec 2016, when his symptoms persisted, he sought further medical attention at a hospital and was hospitalized.After the hospital reported the patient as a suspected case to the health authority, infection with hantavirus hemorrhagic fever was confirmed in the case on 11 Jan 2017. As of now, the case's condition has improved, and he has been discharged from the hospital. None of the family members residing in the same household with the case have developed suspected symptoms.To reduce the risk of further transmission, the local health authority has implemented a number of rodent control measures within a 200 meter radius of the case's residence and neighborhood and provided relevant health education to the residents in the neighborhood.According to the surveillance statistics compiled by the Taiwan CDC, each year, a few cases of hantavirus infection are confirmed. Since 2008, a total of 11 cases of hantavirus hemorrhagic fever have been confirmed. Most of them were men (9 cases), and most cases are aged between 50 and 59 (4 cases).Hantavirus hemorrhagic fever is a zoonosis caused by hantaviruses. Rodents are the natural reservoir for hantaviruses, and the virus is transmitted from infected rodents to humans by inhalation of aerosolized particles from rodent excreta or a bite from infected rodents. The incubation period ranges from a couple of days to 2 months. The virus does not spread between humans. Symptoms usually include persistent fever, inflammation or redness of the eyes, fatigue, lower back pain, abdominal pain, headache, nausea, vomiting, flushing of the face, varying degrees of hemorrhagic manifestations and kidney involvement. Hemorrhaging usually occurs approximately 3-6 days after symptom onset. Later symptoms can include proteinuria, low blood pressure or oliguria. Some patients may experience acute shock and mild kidney disease that could lead to acute kidney failure. Symptoms can be improved upon treatment.As rodent control in and around the home remains the most effective prevention strategy against hantavirus infection, Taiwan CDC urges the public to create a mouse-free environment by adhering to the ""3 don'ts"":don't let rodents enter;don't let rodents stay;don't let rodents eat your food.Taiwan CDC urges restaurants, hotels, eateries, markets, food factories and households to maintain good environmental hygiene and carry out de-ratting measures when necessary. Individuals should avoid contact with rodent droppings, urine, saliva, and nesting materials. Closed storage sheds and cabins are often ideal sites for rodent infestations. While cleaning up rodent droppings and urine, wear a mask, put on gloves, spray the droppings and urine with a disinfectant or a mixture of bleach (100 cc) and water (10 liters), and let the excreta soak in the disinfectant or bleach solution for 30 minutes before disposing of the waste in the garbage.--communicated by:PRO/MBDS<promed-mbds@promedmail.org>[Hantavirus is a new threat to global health that affects 30 000 people annually around the world. Regions especially affected by hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome include China, the Korean Peninsula, Russia (Hantaan, Puumala and Seoul viruses), and northern and western Europe (Puumala and Dobrava virus). Regions with the highest incidences of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome include Patagonia Argentina, Chile, Brazil, the United States, Canada, and Panama.More information about Hantavirus can be found at <https://www.cdc.gov/hantavirus/pdf/hps_brochure.pdf>.Maps of Taiwan can be seen at <http://www.24point0.com/ppt-shop/taiwan-map-powerpoint-presentation> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/55709>. - Mod.QCNThe report above does not indicate which hantavirus is involved in this and in previous cases.In a recent comment on occurrence of hantavirus infectious in Korea and other countries in Asia (ProMED-mail archive no. 20170114.4765047), Dr Jan Clement and colleagues indicated that: ""Muju virus (MUJV) is another zoonotic contender. It is one of 4 rodentborne hantaviruses found in the Republic of Korea. Whereas the other species responsible for HFRS in Korea are Hantaan virus (HTNV), Seoul virus (SEOV), and Soochong virus, MUJV has never been shown so far to be pathogenic for humans, although we have known since the early 1990s that MUJV (or rather ""PUUV-like"") human infections have been found in Korea.""Seoul virus is widely distributed worldwide in the brown rat, _Rattus norvegicus_, which appears to be a likely reservoir host candidate for the viruses involved in this and a case reported in April 2016. A previous study indicated that brown rats were found positive for Seoul virus, which appears to be the most likely virus responsible for these cases.An image of _Rattus norvegicus_ can be accessed at <http://www.discoverlife.org/im/I_RB/0000/320/Rattus_norvegicus,I_RB27.jpg>. - Mod.TY]
