Agriland (Ireland) [edited]<http://www.agriland.ie/farming-news/breaking-case-of-bse-identified-in-cow-in-ireland/>The Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine has confirmed that it has identified a case of atypical BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] in an 18 year old cow through its surveillance of fallen animals (died on farm) at knackeries. It is understood that the case has been identified in a cow in County Galway.The animal tested positive on a screening test carried out at a Department approved, accredited private laboratory over the weekend and was then subject to follow-up confirmatory tests at the Department's Central Veterinary Research Laboratory.There are no associated public health risks with this event; a comprehensive set of public health controls is in place, and the animal in this case was excluded from the food chain, and its carcass will be incinerated, the Department said. It also confirmed that the disclosure of this case of atypical BSE does not have any impact of Ireland's current OIE BSE controlled risk status or trade status.2 types of BSE are recognised:1. Classical BSEClassical BSE, the basis of the extensive incidence of BSE which commenced in the 1980s, which was associated with the feeding of meat-and-bone meal. Scientific evidence indicates that classical BSE is acquired in the 1st year of life.2. Atypical BSEAtypical BSE, which is the case that has been identified today [18 Jan 2017], has been identified more recently, thought to occur spontaneously.Atypical BSE occurs sporadically with a low incidence rate in older animals. It was 1st recognised in the early 2000s in Europe following the large-scale testing of livestock for BSE that was put in place at that time.101 atypical BSE cases have been identified in the European Union during the period 2003 to 2015. This compares to a total of 2999 cases of classical BSE during the same period. Cases have occurred at a very low and relatively constant level over the entire period, ranging from 2 to 11 cases per year, the Department said. At the same time, the number of classical BSE cases has steadily dropped since 2003. All known atypical BSE cases in the EU have been detected in cattle older than 6 years of age.The Department has identified 3 atypical cases which occurred in Ireland, compared with 145 cases of classical BSE in that 13-year period. In addition, retrospective analysis identified a 2002 case as atypical BSE, bringing the total number of confirmed atypical cases in Ireland to 4.BSE does not transfer horizontally from animal to animal; no risk to other animals arises from this case animal.[byline: Amy Forde]--Sabine ZentisCastleview English LonghornsGut LaachD-52385 Nideggen, Germany<cvlonghorns@aol.com>[Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) is a fatal neurological disease of adult cattle that was 1st recognised in Great Britain (GB) during the 1980s and identified in classical (C-type BSE) and atypical forms. Both C-type BSE and atypical forms have been detected in cattle indigenous to most European countries, the Americas, and Asia and the Pacific.BSE is a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE), or prion disease. The archetype for this group of diseases is scrapie of sheep and goats.The C-type BSE epizootic resulted from oral exposure to prions in the ruminant-derived protein of meat-and-bone meal and milk replacers included in animal feedstuffs. As a result of control measures, C-type BSE epizootics are in decline.Experimental transmissibility of all forms of BSE to cattle has been demonstrated. The C-type BSE agent is also believed to be the common source, via dietary routes, of TSEs in other ruminant species and felidae. There is evidence of a causal link between the C-type BSE agent and variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) in humans.The above and additional information on BSE, including its history and diagnostic techniques, is available in chapter 2.4.5 ""Bovine spongiform encephalopathy"" of OIE's terrestrial Manual, available at <http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Health_standards/tahm/2.04.05_BSE.pdf>. - Mod.ASA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/39>.]
