Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/suspect-black-urine-disease-cases-reported-ceara-state-98098/>The secretary of health of the state of CearÌÁ in north eastern Brazil announced receiving reports of 3 suspected cases of ""black urine disease"" last week [week 9 to 15 Jan 2017]. The cases are being investigated by state and municipal health officials and samples were collected for laboratory testing, according to a Rede News 360 report (computer translated).The 3 suspected cases presented with symptoms like those seen in Bahia state last month [December 2016]: muscular pain (mainly in the cervical region, lower and upper limbs), urine with a different color, and alteration in the functions of the kidneys.Black urine disease still does not have an etiology and has been seen in dozens of people in Bahia. If the cases are confirmed in CearÌÁ, they will be the 1st outside Bahia. According to the Bahia State Department of Health, 44 patients had a negative result for bacterial infection.Suspicion has been raised that fish consumed in the region may have caused intoxication. Therefore, samples consumed by people affected by the disease have been sent to the Adolfo Lutz Institute in Sao Paulo and to a laboratory in the United States.[byline: Robert Herriman]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Black or dark urine are usually a sign of increased bilirubin. This can be caused by many diseases, but hemolysis with excreting of free hemoglobin is an obvious reason. If there is a massive hemolysis kidney function will be affected. It will be important to know if the patients were icteric. The outbreak nature seems to exclude porphyria.Previously, ""black water fever"" was a hemolysis seen in malaria patients treated with natural quinine. The absence of fever and no suspicion of malaria seem to rule out this possibility. ProMED-mail will be happy to post further information from knowledgeable sources. - Mod.EPHaff disease, rhabdomyolysis after ingesting certain types of fish, was 1st reported in 1924 in Europe. There have been a limited number of cases reported in the United States, and more farther south to Brazil and throughout Brazil. Symptoms of rhabdomyolysis can occur after eating cooked buffalo fish purchased at a suburban grocery market, or fresh from markets or the ocean. This suggests the substance responsible for rhabdomyolysis is not changed, denatured, or altered by the heat of cooking. A toxicological agent has not been identified. If there is an outbreak of this disease in Brazil we would appreciate an authoritative comment regarding the situation.""...According to the Government of Bahia [Directorate of Epidemiological Surveillance, Health Secretariat of the State of Bahia 16 Dec 2016], up to now, 12 people have had symptoms such as myelitis and urine with black coloration. [The black coloration of the urine is often due to the breakdown of the muscles and release of myoglobin associated with rhabdomyolysis.]""The enigma remains as to whether the clinical picture described in the previous posts is more consistent with a viral disease leading to Bornholm disease or more consistent with Haff disease. - Mods.TG/MPPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1592>.]
