MSN [edited]<http://www.msn.com/en-us/health/medical/8-people-infected-in-rare-us-outbreak-of-rat-virus/ar-AAm4cHZ?li=BBnbfcL>Federal health officials said [Fri 20 Jan 2017] that 8 people who worked at several rat-breeding facilities in Illinois and Wisconsin have been infected with a virus not commonly found in the United States. This is the 1st known outbreak of Seoul virus associated with pet rats in the United States, although there have been several outbreaks in wild rats, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Seoul virus is a member of the Hantavirus family of rodentborne viruses and is carried by wild Norway rats worldwide. Most rats infected with the virus do not appear sick. People typically become infected when they are exposed to body fluids (blood, saliva, urine) from infected rats or are bitten by them. People can't get the virus from other people or from other types of pets, CDC said in a news release.Symptoms of Seoul virus infection in people include fever, severe headache, back and abdominal pain, chills, blurred vision, eye redness and rash. In rare cases, infection can lead to kidney disease. Most people infected with the virus recover, according to CDC.The CDC is working with state and local health officials to determine how this outbreak occurred and whether any other people might be affected. Anyone who recently bought a rat and has Seoul virus symptoms should contact a health care provider immediately.To prevent Seoul virus infection and other diseases carried by rats: wash your hands with soap and running water after touching, feeding or caring for rodents; clean and disinfect rodent habitats and supplies; never clean rodent habitats or supplies in the kitchen sink or bathroom sink; avoid urine or droppings when cleaning rodent cages.Get regular veterinarian checks for pet rodents and be cautious with unfamiliar rodents to reduce the risk of bites and scratches, the agency added. If you are bitten by a rodent, wash the wound with warm, soapy water immediately, and seek medical attention if: the rodent seems sick; your wound is serious or becomes red, painful, warm or swollen; your last tetanus shot was more than 5 years ago; or, you develop fever or flu-like illness a week or 2 after being bitten.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Jan Clement provided a good overview of Seoul virus around the world (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20141028.2907225). Most reports are of Seoul virus in wild rats. However, the virus has also been isolated from laboratory and pet rats. The Clement overview reported, ""subsequent isolation of Cherwell virus, resulting in a neat 'British' clade of SEOV viruses, grouping together Humber, Cherwell, and IR461 (Jameson LJ, Taori SK, Atkinson B, et al. Pet rats as a source of hantavirus in England and Wales, 2013. Euro Surveill. 2013; 18(9): pii=20415; http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20415)...The IR461 had been obtained already in the late 1970s, and had been isolated from SEOV-infected rats imported from Belgium, and having caused a SEOV laboratory outbreak in PHE, Porton Down (Lloyd G, Jones N. Infection of laboratory workers with hantavirus acquired from immunocytomas propagated in laboratory rats. J Infect. 1986; 12(2): 117-25; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2871112). After a long shelf life, IR461 was finally genetically characterized in 2003, that is, at least 24 years after its 1st isolation in 1979 in PHE. IR461 was confirmed as being SEOV, but against all expectations, appeared not related to any known SEOV derived from laboratory rats. The conclusion was that IR461 resulted most likely from an introduction, in Belgium or elsewhere in Eurasia, of a wild rat strain into a colony of laboratory rats (Shi X, McCaughey C, Elliott RM: Genetic characterisation of a hantavirus isolated from a laboratory-acquired Infection. J Med Virol. 2003; 71(1): 105-9; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jmv.10446).""An earlier report of Seoul virus in pet rats Sweden imported from England in 2011 was reported in 2013. The pet rat diagnosed with SEOV was a male which had been imported to Sweden for breeding purposes in 2011 and had a proven pedigree. It had come from England together with 19 other pet rats.A report of these current cases, sent in by Dr Charles Calisher, provided some additional information, ""People who become infected with the Seoul virus can develop fever, severe headaches, back and abdominal pain, chills, blurred vision, red eyes, or a rash, the CDC said. But some people infected with the virus don't show any symptoms. All 8 people infected in the current outbreak have recovered, and 5 out of the 6 people in Illinois who tested positive for the virus did not show symptoms, the IDPH said. Rats infected with the virus do not typically show symptoms."" (<http://www.livescience.com/57576-pet-rats-seoul-virus-infections.html>).A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Illinois and Wisconsin in the Upper Midwest USA can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/216>. - Mod.TY]
