WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/24-january-2017-hepatitis-e-chad/en/>Hepatitis E - Chad------------------From 1 Sep 2016 until 13 Jan 2017, a total of 693 cases including 11 deaths of acute jaundice syndrome (AJS) have been reported from Am Timan, Chad.Of the 50 patients with AJS who were hospitalized, 48 were tested for hepatitis E using the Hepatitis E virus rapid diagnostic test (HEV RDT) and 27 (56.3 per cent ) tested positive. In total, at the end of epidemiological week 2 [9 to 15 Jan 2017], a total of 126 HEV RDT have been performed, of them 57 (45.2 per cent ) were positive, while 69 (54.8 per cent ) tested negative for hepatitis E. A total of 18 (31.6 per cent ) of the 57 patients that tested positive using the HEV RDT, also had a positive malaria test, and 20 (29 per cent ) out of 69 patients that tested negative using the HEV RDT also had a positive malaria test. Since September 2016, 11 deaths have been reported among the hospitalized cases but the total case fatality might be underestimated.As of 13 Jan 2017, 16 pregnant women presenting with AJS have been hospitalized and tested for hepatitis E; 12 (75 per cent ) of them tested positive using the HEV RDT. Of the pregnant women presenting with AJS, 4 have reportedly died (3 had tested positive for hepatitis E).Approximately 90 per cent of the AJS cases were reported from Am Timan which appears to be the epicentre of the ongoing outbreak, and most of the cases are identified through active case findings. As of 13 Jan 2017, AJS cases have been reported from 59 different quartiers in and surrounding Am Timan.Public health response----------------------In response to the ongoing outbreak and event response, WHO and the Ministry of Public Health are carrying out investigations in the whole region in order to describe the extent of the outbreak. Moreover, WHO country office is also supporting passive and active surveillance strengthening outside of Am Timan, developing case definition, surveillance tools, simple case management protocols and testing algorithm, defining criteria for case hospitalization and carrying out needs assessment in and outside the town of Am Timan. WHO is also actively looking for partnerships to address the needs in terms of water and sanitation in Am Timan.WHO risk assessment-------------------Based on the available information, there appears to be a plateau in the number of cases reported in the past 5 weeks from the affected area with an average of 70 cases reported weekly where only a minor proportion (7.2 per cent ) requiring hospitalization. The infectious risk seems confined to Am Timan and immediate surroundings. However, the event remains under close monitoring at all levels of WHO. The current level of risk for further spread remains as moderate to high and at local level, and the limited capacity to respond to date calls for additional immediate support, especially in terms of water and sanitation and social mobilization.WHO advice----------WHO recommends the continuation of the investigations with a specific case definition as to describe the time, place and person characteristics of the outbreak and identify the source. It is important to identify the source of contamination of the surface water and, in the meantime, to ensure water safety by chlorination at the point of use by the population. Travelers to Chad should follow standard hygiene recommendations in terms of water and food safety for travellers. These should protect them against hepatitis E, as the risk of person to person transmission is very low.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Hepatitis E is found worldwide, and different genotypes of the hepatitis E virus determine differences in epidemiology. For example, genotype 1 is usually seen in developing countries and causes community-level outbreaks, while genotype 3 is usually seen in the developed countries and does not cause outbreaks. Globally, 57 000 deaths and 3.4 million cases of acute hepatitis E are attributable to infection with hepatitis E virus genotypes 1 and 2.The highest seroprevalence rates (number of persons in a population who test positive for the disease) are observed in regions where low standards of sanitation increase the risk for transmission of the virus. Over 60 per cent of all hepatitis E infections and 65 per cent of all hepatitis E deaths occur in East and South Asia, where seroprevalence rates of 25 per cent are common in some age groups. In Egypt, half the population aged above 5 years is serologically positive for the hepatitis E virus (<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs280/en/index.html>). - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/57>.]
