CNN [edited]<http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/27/health/homeopathic-teething-belladonna-fda/>The Food and Drug Administration urged parents [Fri 27 Jan 2017] to not use Hyland's homeopathic teething products containing belladonna, commonly known as deadly nightshade, a toxic substance.Standard Homeopathic Co., the Los Angeles-based maker of Hyland's, discontinued its product 7 Oct [2016]. ""We discontinued it because we are committed to our moms and our dads who choose to trust us to put medicines in their young infants' mouths, and we didn't want to put them in a place between the FDA warning and us saying the product was safe and having to decide who to trust,"" said Mary C. Borneman, a spokeswoman for Hyland's.Homeopathic teething tablets, which have been around since the early 1900s, provide temporary relief to babies growing their 1st teeth. The FDA originally issued a safety alert in 2010 that recommended against Hyland's Teething Tablets based on laboratory results showing that they contained inconsistent amounts of belladonna. Since then, the agency has received more than 400 reports of adverse events linked to teething products that contain belladonna.""Most describe serious adverse events, like seizures,"" said Lyndsay Meyer, a spokeswoman for the FDA. ""We are also aware of reports of 10 deaths during that time period that reference homeopathic teething products."" Whether these deaths directly relate to teething products ""has not yet been determined and is currently under review,"" Meyer added.The FDA issued a 2nd belladonna warning in September [2016?]. Though Hyland's discontinued the product in October [2016?], it continued to affirm the safety on its website. ""Our understanding is that the Food and Drug Administration's investigation of these products is still ongoing,"" says the company's news release issued at that time [October 2016?]. ""The fact is that we have not been made aware of any medical or statistical evidence to support a causal link between homeopathic teething tablets and adverse outcomes at this point. We continue to request any available information and statistics from the FDA.""The FDA announcement [Fri 27 Jan 2017] confirms its original laboratory assessment of inconsistent amounts of belladonna. ""They showed some limited data on samples they tested that indicated inconsistent amounts of belladonna alkaloid at the nanogram level,"" Borneman said. However, the results ""remained within the documented margin of safety. The implication in the FDA release is that consumers who still have the product shouldn't use it because it might be unsafe,"" she said.The FDA release noted that Raritan Pharmaceuticals, based in New Jersey, recalled 3 of its belladonna-containing homeopathic products in November [2016], yet Hyland's had not issued a recall. ""They never actually asked us.""[Byline: Susan Scutti]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Date: Thu 13 Oct 2016, 12:48 PM ETSource: CNN [edited]<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/12/health/hylands-teething-tablets-discontinued-fda-warning/>[This article is from last year when the 10 deaths were identified and suspected to be due to the use of this product. - Mod.MPP]A total of 10 deaths of children who used homeopathic teething tablets and 400 adverse events associated with the tablets have been reported to the US Food and Drug Administration, the agency said [Wed 12 Oct 2016].The FDA warned caregivers to stop using the products, which parents use to soothe teething babies, and to take their child to a doctor immediately if the child experiences problems. The agency is investigating the adverse events and the cases involving the deaths, as ""the relationship of these deaths to the homeopathic teething products has not yet been determined and is currently under review,"" according to a statement.The deaths and adverse events (including fever, lethargy, vomiting, sleepiness, tremors, shortness of breath, irritability and agitation) occurred over the past 6 years.In an emailed statement, Hyland's, a maker of homeopathic teething tablets and gel, said, ""Hyland's has not been made aware of any data that supports the claims in the warning against our teething tablets and gels. Our understanding is that the Food and Drug Administration's investigation of these products is still ongoing. The fact is that we have not been made aware of any medical or statistical evidence to support a causal link between homeopathic teething tablets and adverse outcomes at this point. We continue to request any available information and statistics from the FDA.""Hyland's said this week that it will stop distributing the products in the United States. The company said in a letter posted on its website [Tue 11 Oct 2016] that it chose to discontinue US distribution of its teething products. ""This decision was made in light of the recent warning issued by the Food & Drug Administration against the use of homeopathic teething tablets and gels. This warning has created confusion among parents and limited access to the medicines,"" the letter from Hyland's employees said. ""Putting you in a position of having to choose who to trust in the face of contradictory information is burdensome and undermines the FDA.""There is no recall on the products, including Hyland's Baby Teething Tablets, Hyland's Baby Teething Tablets Nighttime and Hyland's Baby Teething Gel. CVS, one of the drugstore chains that sold Hyland's, Baby Orajel Naturals and its own version of the teething products, pulled all of them from the shelves after the FDA warning. Walgreens also confirmed that it has withdrawn homeopathic teething products that were subject to this FDA warning. ""We are confident that any available Hyland's teething products, including those you already have, are safe for use,"" the Hyland's letter said. ""Of course, parents who may have concerns should consult with their physicians before using any medicines, read labels carefully and follow all instructions. We look forward to the future of homeopathic medicines as we work in partnership with the FDA,"" the letter said.The FDA issued a safety alert about the tablets in 2010, and Hyland's issued a recall at that time. After lab testing, the FDA said it found inconsistent amounts of belladonna in the tablets. The agency also had reports of adverse events related to using the products that were consistent with belladonna toxicity. The FDA also was concerned because the bottles didn't have child-resistant caps.Since 2010, Hyland's said, it reformulated the product to reduce the amount of belladonna and revamped its production process. ""We also improved our system to monitor, investigate and trend all safety reports on any of our products. We have not seen any trend to indicate that Hyland's teething medicines pose any risk to consumers,"" it said on its website.The American Academy of Pediatrics' HealthyChildren.org has warned parents to stay away from teething tablets that contain belladonna and gels with benzocaine, citing the FDA warnings and the potential side effects.Instead of teething tablets or gels, the American Academy of Pediatrics suggests that parents massage the child's gums with a clean finger when a baby is in pain; use a solid teething ring or clean, wet washcloth that's been chilled in the freezer; frozen bananas, berries or bagels. Parents can also give a weight-appropriate dose of acetaminophen, but should ask the child's doctor about an appropriate dose.[Byline: Jen Christensen, Jamie Gumbrecht and Hailey Middlebrook]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[3]Date: Mon 30 Jan 2017, 7:20 PM ESTSource: KSLA [edited]<http://www.ksla.com/story/34383169/teething-treatment-tests-positive-for-toxic-substance>Government doctors don't want parents to sooth teething babies with homeopathic tablets.The Food and Drug Administration has the new guidance because testing of homeopathic tablets came back positive for belladonna. The toxic substance can cause seizures, excessive sleepiness, muscle weakness and skin flushing.The maker of Hyland's teething tablets has decided to discontinue production. Raritan Pharmaceuticals recalled 3 homeopathic products, which contained belladonna, last year [2016].--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Belladonna is the common name for the plant _Atropa belladonna_. This is a member of the nightshade family, which includes tomatoes, potatoes and eggplants.This plant is a member of the Solanaceae family or the family of the deadly nightshades. Most of these plants include tropane alkaloids which include atropine, scopolamine and hyscyamine. These may also be known as belladonna alkaloids. The toxins are the alkaloids which are known to produce hallucinations and delirium.These alkaloids were often put into the eyes of young women. The pupils of the eyes dilate, and the ladies with large eyes were considered to be more attractive. However, the woman may not have recognized her suitor in the daylight as the dilated pupils would have prevented her from seeing clearly. The term belladonna means ""pretty lady"" in Italian.This alkaloid has long history of being used in medicine, poisons and cosmetics. Medically the class of belladonna alkaloids include atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine, which have anticholineric properties. When combined with phenobarbitol it is used to treat irritable bowel syndrome.However, this plant alkaloid has a darker side because of its atropine like properties it can disrupt the parasympathetic nervous system, thereby affecting how the body regulates its involuntary activities such as breathing, sweating and importantly, the heart rate. Detrimental signs may be reversed with physostigmine or pilocarpine, however, one must notice the irregularity in the signs of the patient.Belladonna poisoning may cause symptoms related to the effect of the toxins, including dilated pupils (and, therefore, sensitivity to light), blurry vision, staggering, perhaps a loss of balance, headache, tachycardia (rapid heart rate), flushing of the skin, and very dry mouth and throat. Speech may be slurred, and there is often evidence of delirium and convulsions. The affected person may have hallucinations and severe confusion. Some people may have constipation and/or urine retention. These latter symptoms may not have been noticed in teething children.Treatment for belladonna alkaloids intoxication are pharmaceutical anticholinergics, such as physostigmine or pilocarpine. This is the same treatment as for atropine poisoning.Herbal product safety testing and efficacy testing are quite different from those of drugs that go through the formal pharmacological testing required by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). While herbals can be quite effective, some can be toxic, as possibly in this case.Neither of these articles tells us what levels of belladonna were found in the teething tablets, but if it was inconsistent levels it may speak to a deadly issue if the level were higher than reported. What is interesting is that the Food and Drug Administration issued a safety alert, but did not apparently take action against the product. Even now it does not appear to be a recall mandated by the FDA but rather a voluntary recall by the manufacturer.It is also difficult to understand if there were 10 children that died, or if any of these 10 survived. Different articles report it differently and the FDA has not reported the death of any children at this time. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
