The Canadian Press and CTV news [edited]<http://www.ctvnews.ca/health/b-c-drug-users-test-positive-for-carfentanil-1.3267153>The appearance of the deadly opioid carfentanil may explain the dramatic spike in overdoses in British Columbia, despite efforts to slow the carnage, the provincial health officer says.Dr. Perry Kendall said as the number of [drug] overdose deaths climbed to record levels in November and December [2016], officials suspected the synthetic drug normally used as a tranquilizer on large animals like elephants was to blame.B.C.'s Health Ministry announced [Wed 1 Feb 2017] a small number of urine tests conducted over a 2-week period at drug treatment facilities across Metro Vancouver tested positive for carfentanil.""It's not good news, it's confirmation of what we had feared,"" Kendall says. ""It means the drug supply has become considerably more dangerous than it was beforehand.""The ministry says carfentanil can be 100 times more toxic than fentanyl, the drug at the root of the province's overdose crisis.The tests were done on 1766 urine samples. Fifty-seven were positive for carfentanil.Kendall said because the samples were collected from people already in treatment, the numbers may not be representative of what's happening on the streets.""It may under-represent the actual extent to which carfentanil is present,"" he said.There is no reliable way for people to know if carfentanil is laced with other illicit drugs, and the Health Ministry is urging users to follow harm-reduction measures, such as having someone sober present and carrying the opioid antidote naloxone.Kendall said overdose prevention sites that have been set up in a number of cities become even more important in light of the increased risks.He also urged occasional drug users who may experiment with substances like ecstasy to steer clear.""You don't know what you're getting. It's much more dangerous,"" he said.The drug testing is part of surveillance measures related to a public health emergency declared last April [2016]. There were 914 illicit drug overdoses last year in B.C., the highest number on record.Kendall said the presence of carfentanil doesn't change the way the province has responded to the crisis, but it does make matters more urgent.Officials are working to create more options for treatment and make it easier to access, he said.""It's a little hard to imagine how we could be running any faster, to be honest, but we have to try.""The ministry said it is getting weekly surveillance reports on carfentanil and police are giving priority to investigations into drug trafficking because of the overdose crisis.The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and China's ministry of public security are working together to disrupt the supply of illegal carfentanil, fentanyl and other opioids coming into Canada. [Hopefully, synthetic opiods as well. - Mod.TG]British Columbia's toxicology centre, which provides forensic analysis on overdose fatalities to the coroner, recently bought new instruments that are more sensitive and accurate in testing for carfentanil and other opioids, and regular testing is expected to begin next month [March 2017].The ministry said carfentanil was already found at the site of one overdose fatality in the province, but results are still pending on whether it was the cause of the death.The total number of fentanyl-related overdose deaths for 2016 is expected to be updated in March [2017], however, previous data shows the substance was detected in about 60 percent of deaths between January and October.[Byline: Linda Givetash, The Canadian Press]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Carfentanil is a synthetic opioid. The question on my mind is how did the individual (s) acquire the drug? What was the source? The internet? A photo on the original site shows the drug in a printer cartridge but it does not explain how the individual(s) acquired the drugs. It is a controlled substance, and as such it clearly must have an underground market.According to the US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), several warnings have been issued (<https://www.dea.gov/divisions/hq/2016/hq092216.shtml>):22 Sep 2016Contact: DEA Public Affairs(202) 307-7977DEA Issues Carfentanil Warning to Police and PublicDangerous opioid 10 000 times more potent than morphine and 100 times more potent than fentanyl.22 Sep 2016 (Washington) - DEA has issued a public warning to the public and law enforcement nationwide about the health and safety risks of carfentanil. Carfentanil is a synthetic opioid that is 10 000 times more potent than morphine and 100 times more potent than fentanyl, which itself is 50 times more potent than heroin. DEA, local law enforcement, and 1st responders have recently seen the presence of carfentanil, which has been linked to a significant number of overdose deaths in various parts of the country. Improper handling of carfentanil, as well as fentanyl and other fentanyl-related compounds, has deadly consequences.""Carfentanil is surfacing in more and more communities."" said DEA Acting Administrator Chuck Rosenberg. ""We see it on the streets, often disguised as heroin. It is crazy dangerous. Synthetics such as fentanyl and carfentanil can kill you. I hope our 1st responders -- and the public -- will read and heed our health and safety warning. These men and women have remarkably difficult jobs and we need them to be well and healthy.""Carfentanil is a Schedule II substance under the Controlled Substances Act and is used as a tranquilizing agent for elephants and other large mammals. The lethal dose range for carfentanil in humans is unknown. However, as noted, carfentanil is approximately 100 times more potent than fentanyl, which can be lethal at the 2-milligram range, depending on route of administration and other factors.Carfentanil and other fentanyl-related compounds are a serious danger to public safety, 1st responder, medical, treatment, and laboratory personnel. These substances can come in several forms, including powder, blotter paper, tablets, and spray; they can be absorbed through the skin or accidental inhalation of airborne powder. If encountered, responding personnel should do the following based on the specific situation:Exercise extreme caution. Only properly trained and outfitted law enforcement professionals should handle any substance suspected to contain fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound. If encountered, contact the appropriate officials within your agency.Be aware of any sign of exposure. Symptoms include: respiratory depression or arrest, drowsiness, disorientation, sedation, pinpoint pupils, and clammy skin. The onset of these symptoms usually occurs within minutes of exposure.Seek IMMEDIATE medical attention. Carfentanil and other fentanyl-related substances can work very quickly, so in cases of suspected exposure, it is important to call EMS immediately. If inhaled, move the victim to fresh air. If ingested and the victim is conscious, wash out the victim's eyes and mouth with cool water.Be ready to administer naloxone in the event of exposure. Naloxone is an antidote for opioid overdose. Immediately administering naloxone can reverse an overdose of carfentanil, fentanyl, or other opioids, although multiple doses of naloxone may be required. Continue to administer a dose of naloxone every 2-3 minutes until the individual is breathing on his/her own for at least 15 minutes or until EMS arrives.""Naloxone, the reversal agent for many opiod and synthetic opiods is readily available at may overdose treatment centers, hospitals and other treatment facilitesRemember that carfentanil can resemble powdered cocaine or heroin. If you suspect the presence of carfentanil or any synthetic opioid, do not take samples or otherwise disturb the substance, as this could lead to accidental exposure. Rather, secure the substance and follow approved transportation procedures.Carfentanil is a fentanyl-related substance not approved for use in humans. In June [2016], DEA released a Roll Call video to all law enforcement nationwide about the dangers of improperly handling fentanyl and its deadly consequences. Acting Deputy Administrator Jack Riley and 2 local police detectives from New Jersey appear on the video to urge any law enforcement personnel who come in contact with fentanyl or fentanyl compounds to take the drugs directly to a lab.""Fentanyl can kill you,"" Riley said. ""Fentanyl is being sold as heroin in virtually every corner of our country. It's produced clandestinely in Mexico, and (also) comes directly from China. It is 40 to 50 times stronger than street-level heroin. A very small amount ingested, or absorbed through your skin, can kill you.""Two Atlantic County, NJ detectives were recently exposed to a very small amount of fentanyl, and appeared on the video. Said one detective: ""I thought that was it. I thought I was dying. It felt like my body was shutting down."" Riley also admonished police to skip testing on the scene, and encouraged them to also remember potential harm to police canines during the course of duties. ""Don't field test it in your car, or on the street, or take if back to the office. Transport it directly to a laboratory, where it can be safely handled and tested."" The video can be accessed at: <http://go.usa.gov/chBgh>.The warning from the DEA is especially important as it includes animals. Pets are especially sensitive as well and could encounter the substance from the paraphernalia of an owner-user. Do not neglect signs of sudden collapse in your pets. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12>.]
