Food Poisoning Bulletin [edited]<https://foodpoisoningbulletin.com/2017/norovirus-outbreak-in-washington-associated-with-raw-oysters/>King County Public Health is investigating a cluster of ""norovirus-like"" illnesses associated with eating raw oysters in their area. That virus is found in the stool and vomit of infected people. The virus is very contagious and is spread through contaminated food and person-to-person contact. Consuming raw and undercooked shellfish, especially oysters, increases your chances of getting sick.On [Thu 19 Jan 2017], Public Health was notified about 4 cases of norovirus-like illness from the same party who ate raw oysters at Taylor Shellfish, located at 124 Republican Street in Seattle on [Wed 4 Jan 2017]. The patients got sick about 24 hours after eating the oysters, with symptoms including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, headache, and muscle aches.Environmental Health Inspectors were sent to the restaurant on [Wed 11 Jan 2017], to review the facility's process for handling, preparing, and serving the oysters. Oyster tags that identified where the shellfish came from were also collected. The Washington Department of Health conducted trace back and investigated the oyster growing areas.No issues were identified at the restaurant that could contribute to the illnesses. And the illnesses haven't been connected to any others that stemmed from the same growing areas.Norovirus can survive in ocean water for long periods of time. Shellfish are filter feeders; that means they take in the virus if it's in the water. And oysters concentrate the virus to much higher levels. Sources of the virus include failing septic systems, storm water runoff, boat sewage waste, and faulty wastewater treatment plants.Norovirus is more common in the winter months, when people are indoors and in close contact with each other. But the illness can also be caused by contaminated food. To prevent norovirus, always cook shellfish and other seafood before you eat it. Wash cutting boards and counters that are used for shellfish preparation immediately after use, with soap and running water. And wash your hands well with soap and water after using the bathroom, changing diapers, and preparing food.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Oysters not only transmit human norovirus, they also serve as a major reservoir for pathogens, according to research published in 2015 in Applied and Environmental Microbiology. ""More than 80 percent of human norovirus genotypes were detected in oyster samples or oyster-related outbreaks,"" according to corresponding author Yongjie Wang, PhD.""The results highlight oysters' important role in the persistence of norovirus in the environment, and its transmission to humans, and they demonstrate the need for surveillance of human norovirus in oyster samples,"" said Wang, Professor in the College of Food Science and Technology, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China.In the study, the investigators downloaded all oyster-related norovirus sequences deposited during 1983-2014 into the National Center for Biotechnology's GenBank database, and into the Noronet outbreak database. They conducted genotyping and phylogenic analyses, and mapped the norovirus's genetic diversity and geographic distribution over time.In earlier research, the investigators found that 90 percent of human norovirus sequences in China came from coastal regions. The current research showed that the same is true all over the world, except in tropical regions, from which sequences are absent.Oysters' status as reservoirs and vectors for human norovirus transmission is likely abetted by their presence in coastal waters, which are frequently contaminated by human waste, said Wang. Previous research suggests that noroviruses can persist for weeks in oyster tissues, and commercial depuration fails to expunge them.Norovirus causes stomach pain, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. It is extremely contagious, and infects more than 6 percent of the US population, annually, resulting in around 20 million cases, including 56 000-71 000 hospitalizations and 570-800 deaths, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Even touching a contaminated surface can result in infection.Wang advised that people who eat oysters and other shellfish should eat them fully cooked, and never raw. He also urged development of a reliable method for detecting noroviruses in oysters, and a worldwide oyster-related norovirus outbreak surveillance network. The full study can be found online here.Y Yu, H Cai, L Hu. Molecular epidemiology of oyster-related human noroviruses: Global genetic diversity and temporal-geographical distribution from 1983 to 2014. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. doi:10.1128/AEM.01729-15<http://bit.ly/2kn6atV>A map showing the location of Washington in the USA may be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/248>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3248>.]
