Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA (PNAS) [edited]<http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2017/01/30/1621485114.abstract>[Ref: McPherson RL, Abraham R, Sreekumar E, et al: ADP-ribosylhydrolase activity of chikungunya virus macrodomain is critical for virus replication and virulence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017. pii: 201621485. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1621485114]----------------------------------------------------------------------Significance------------Viral outbreaks can be sudden and result in devastating social and economic consequences. Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) outbreaks of rash, arthritis, and neurologic disease have occurred in Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Americas. There are no licensed vaccines to prevent or drugs to treat CHIKV infection, and the mechanisms of disease generation are poorly understood. Here, we identify a macrodomain-containing CHIKV protein with enzymatic ADP-ribosylhydrolase activity that is critical for virulence in mammals and define the substrate specificity of this enzyme. Given the conservation of viral macrodomains in all alphaviruses and coronaviruses, our study may guide the design of small molecule chemical compounds that block hydrolase activity for treatment of a range of virus infections.Abstract--------Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), an Old World alphavirus, is transmitted to humans by infected mosquitoes and causes acute rash and arthritis, occasionally complicated by neurologic disease and chronic arthritis. One determinant of alphavirus virulence is nonstructural protein 3 (nsP3) that contains a highly conserved MacroD-type macrodomain at the N terminus, but the roles of nsP3 and the macrodomain in virulence have not been defined. Macrodomain is a conserved protein fold found in several plus-strand RNA viruses that binds to the small molecule ADP-ribose. Prototype MacroD-type macrodomains also hydrolyze derivative linkages on the distal ribose ring. Here, we demonstrated that the CHIKV nsP3 macrodomain is able to hydrolyze ADP-ribose groups from mono(ADP-ribosyl)ated proteins. Using mass spectrometry, we unambiguously defined its substrate specificity as mono(ADP-ribosyl)ated aspartate and glutamate but not lysine residues. Mutant viruses lacking hydrolase activity were unable to replicate in mammalian BHK-21 cells or mosquito _Aedes albopictus_ cells and rapidly reverted catalytically inactivating mutations. Mutants with reduced enzymatic activity had slower replication in mammalian neuronal cells and reduced virulence in 2-day-old mice. Therefore, nsP3 mono(ADP-ribosyl)hydrolase activity is critical for CHIKV replication in both vertebrate hosts and insect vectors, and for virulence in mice.--Communicated by:Roland HÌÄåÄÌâåÄÌÄåâÌâå bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[It will be interesting to see if these observations will lead to effective drug development. - Mod.TY]******[3] TreatmentDate: Wed 1 Feb 2017Source: Science Translational Medicine 9 (375) DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah3438<http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/375/eaah3438>[Ref: Miner JJ, Cook LE, Hong JP, et al: Therapy with CTLA4-Ig and an antiviral monoclonal antibody controls chikungunya virus arthritis. Science Translational Medicine 2017; 9(375)]----------------------------------------------------------------------Taming T cells to ameliorate chikungunya arthritis--------------------------------------------------Mosquito-borne chikungunya virus causes fever and joint pain; some patients suffer from arthritis for years with no treatment options. In this issue, 2 studies investigated targeting pathogenic CD4+ T cells to prevent arthritis symptoms in a mouse model of chikungunya virus infection. Teo et al demonstrated that fingolimod, a drug that sequesters immune cells to lymphoid organs, was able to relieve arthritis symptoms without affecting viral replication. Miner et al. used a combination of abatacept, which blocks T cell costimulation, and a human chikungunya neutralizing antibody to reduce both viral replication and disease severity. Repurposing these clinically available therapies could provide treatment options for chikungunya patients.Abstract--------In 2013, chikungunya virus (CHIKV) transmission was documented in the Western Hemisphere, and the virus has since spread throughout the Americas with more than 1.8 million people infected in more than 40 countries. CHIKV targets the joints, resulting in symmetric polyarthritis that clinically mimics rheumatoid arthritis and can endure for months to years. At present, no approved treatment is effective in preventing or controlling CHIKV infection or disease. We treated mice with 8 different disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and identified CLTA4-Ig (abatacept) and tofacitinib as candidate therapies based on their ability to decrease acute joint swelling. CTLA4-Ig reduced T cell accumulation in the joints of infected animals without affecting viral infection. Whereas monotherapy with CTLA4-Ig or a neutralizing anti-CHIKV human monoclonal antibody provided partial clinical improvement, therapy with both abolished swelling and markedly reduced levels of chemokines, proinflammatory cytokines, and infiltrating leukocytes. Thus, combination CTLA4-Ig and antiviral antibody therapy controls acute CHIKV infection and arthritis and may be a candidate for testing in humans.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This looks very promising as a treatment for chikungunya virus infections. One hopes that it is as effective in humans as reported for mice. - Mod.TY]******[4] VaccineDate: Mon 19 Dec 2016Source: Nature Medicine doi:10.1038/nm.4253 [edited]<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/12/161219161554.htm>[Ref: Erasmus JH, Auguste A, Kaelber JT, et al: A chikungunya fever vaccine utilizing an insect-specific virus platform. Nat Med. 2016 Dec 19. doi: 10.1038/nm.4253]---------------------------------------------------------------------- Summary--------Traditionally, vaccine development involves tradeoffs between immunogenicity and safety. Live-attenuated vaccines typically offer rapid and durable immunity but have reduced safety when compared to inactivated vaccines. In contrast, the inability of inactivated vaccines to replicate enhances safety at the expense of immunogenicity, often necessitating multiple doses and boosters. To overcome these tradeoffs, we developed the insect-specific alphavirus, Eilat virus (EILV), as a vaccine platform. To address the chikungunya fever (CHIKF) pandemic, we used an EILV cDNA clone to design a chimeric virus containing the chikungunya virus (CHIKV) structural proteins. The recombinant EILV/CHIKV was structurally identical at 10 angstroms to wild-type CHIKV, as determined by single-particle cryo-electron microscopy, and it mimicked the early stages of CHIKV replication in vertebrate cells from attachment and entry to viral RNA delivery. Yet the recombinant virus remained completely defective for productive replication, providing a high degree of safety. A single dose of EILV/CHIKV produced in mosquito cells elicited rapid (within 4 days) and long-lasting (longer than 290 days) neutralizing antibodies that provided complete protection in 2 different mouse models. In nonhuman primates, EILV/CHIKV elicited rapid and robust immunity that protected against viremia and telemetrically monitored fever. Our EILV platform represents the 1st structurally native application of an insect-specific virus in preclinical vaccine development and highlights the potential application of such viruses in vaccinology.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This vaccine looks very promising. One hopes that it will be possible to begin phase 1 testing in humans soon. - Mod.TY]
