El Tiempo [in Spanish, trans. Mod.MPP, edited]<http://www.eltiempo.com/estilo-de-vida/salud/mujer-muere-por-rabia-en-colombia/16807133>A 25-year-old woman died in the San Ignacio de Bogota Hospital from human rabies, which was transmitted through a cat bite, the cat coming from the Tequendama zone in Cundinamarca.The case, confirmed by the National Institute of Health (INS), is the 2nd case in 15 months caused by the wildlife type of rabies virus and is leading to alarms from the Health Authorities because the disease [rabies] in humans was considered controlled. The virus has killed 34 people in the last 12 years.The patient (in Bogota) received a cat in the middle of December [2016] that was brought by family members. This cat was found on the sidewalk in the region 5 months ago.The animal showed signs of illness and was taken the same day to a veterinarian, where, despite being hospitalized for 2 days, they did not suspect the presence of the virus [rabies], and the cat was discharged on some medications. [Since rabies vaccinations are free in Colombia, likely the veterinarian assumed the animal had previously been vaccinated. This is why tags and microchips are so important when vaccinating animals. - Mod.TG]Already in the house, according to information provided by the relatives to the health authorities, the young girl was bitten on a finger on her right hand. The woman only washed the wound with a disinfectant. Meanwhile, the cat began showing increased aggression and deteriorated, and was taken to another veterinarian, where it was euthanized on 10 Dec 2016.Although the event seemed forgotten, on 10 Jan 2017, she [the victim that was bitten] presented with dizziness, accompanied by pain in her elbow and loss of sensation in her right arm, forcing her to consult a doctor, who diagnosed vertigo and sent her home.However, her clinical picture was complicated, with difficulty breathing, behavioral changes, sweating and numbness in her arms, so she consulted with the doctor again and told them she had ""anxiety."" On 15 Jan 2017, with urinary incontinence, high fever and dilated pupils, she was taken to the emergency room at San Ignacio.During the hospitalization, she presented with a rapid neurological and respiratory deterioration, and after multiple laboratory examinations, in addition to the report (a little late) from the family about the cat bite, the diagnosis of rabies-associated encephalitis was made, and they continued with management of her critical and progressive state.On Sat 21 Jan 2017, the patient died, and the INS autopsy confirmed the diagnosis of rabies.The Ministries of Health of Bogota and Cundinamarca, who have been leading the investigations, have deployed epidemiological measures. Specifically, attention to the family was prioritized, with reports of other possible injuries put under strict surveillance along with potential contacts elsewhere and review of the veterinarians where the cat was cared for, and an epidemiologic ring was established in the area where the cat came from. This is all aimed at reducing the risk of a disease that once transmitted to humans is inevitably fatal.Urban and wildlife cyclesIn Colombia, rabies presents in 2 forms or cycles of transmission: one in dogs (urban) and the other in foxes or other wild animals such as bats.In recent years, cats have become determining factors in the transmission of the disease from bats to humans. Their nocturnal hunting habits have led them to exposure to the bats, from which the cats can acquire the virus and then transmit it to people through their bites or scratches.According to the Ministry of Health, in the past 13 years, there have been 4 rabies cases caused by the urban form (transmitted by dogs) and 33 cases from wildlife.Health authorities recommend extreme surveillance of dogs and domestic cats. These animals should be vaccinated from the ages of 3 months, and in case of adoption, a veterinarian review is mandatory. Rabies vaccination is free.What to do with an animal that attacks?- Take it to the closest health unit.- In case of leaving it for observation, do not sell it or give it away as a gift, changing its residence.- Isolate it from other animals; do not let it loose in the street during the observation period.- Do not kill it. Keep safety checks.- Immediately inform the health authorities whenever there is a change in its behavior or health status or in the event of its death or disappearance.[Byline: Carlos Franciso Fernandez]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Since rabies vaccine is free in Colombia, there is no excuse for the cat not to have been vaccinated when someone found it, decided to adopt it, or present it as a gift. The finder, upon deciding to adopt or to gift the animal, should have had it vaccinated. Without rabies tags or microchips, then perhaps one should assume the animal has not been vaccinated and revaccinate it.If there is no knowledge of a vaccine being given, then the person bitten or the person caring for the person who was bitten should seek immediate medical assistance.This story represents tragedy at all levels. The bite victim's life was lost; the family lost a member, and the cat suffered a horrible disease and died as well.Controlling rabies is paramount in any country at every level. This should spur the authorities to host a rabies drive to ensure that all animals are vaccinated, as well as to educate the public.If bitten, clean the wound thoroughly with soap and water and seek immediate medical attention. Had this been done, post exposure prophylaxis (PEP) could have been administered to save the victim's life. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: < http://healthmap.org/promed/p/4954>.]
