Arkansas Matters [edited]<http://www.arkansasmatters.com/news/local-news/mumps-the-latest-cases-in-arkansas/649536109>The Arkansas mumps outbreak continues to spread as 2 more school districts have announced cases.The Pocahontas and Benton School Districts each announced a case of the mumps on Fri [3 Feb 2017].The outbreak appears to still be primarily contained to the northwestern part of the state. So far, 49 different schools in 17 school districts, 3 colleges or vocational schools and 3 private schools have been affected by the mumps.Arkansas currently leads the nation with more than 2000 mumps cases. The majority of these cases are among schoolchildren, the Arkansas Department of Health (ADH) says.The ADH is also looking into 2 unconfirmed cases of the mumps involving students at Arkansas Tech in Russellville.Mumps is spread from an infected person through coughing, sneezing, or contact with saliva. Mumps is a viral infection that causes one or more salivary glands (located in the cheeks, below and in front of the ears) to become inflamed, swollen, and tender. Other symptoms include fever, fatigue, headaches, swelling or tenderness in the neck/jaw area, headache, muscle aches, tiredness, rash, and flu-like symptoms.The best way to prevent mumps is through vaccination. The mumps vaccination is given in combination as MMR or MMRV with measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella. Most students have received 1-2 MMR vaccinations. If you haven't received a vaccination for mumps, the MMR is available in the Health and Wellness Center. Keeping hands clean, coughing or sneezing into a tissue or your elbow, and refraining from sharing drinking or eating utensils are also important steps in preventing the spread of the illness.[Byline: Ellen Lampe]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[In the past several years, increasing numbers of college students and others have started getting mumps in spite of an effective vaccine, and 2016 marks the biggest spike in a decade. Seven states (Arkansas, Iowa, Indiana, Illinois, Massachusetts, New York and Oklahoma) have each reported more than 100 cases this year [2017]. [As of 31 Dec 2016, 46 states and the District of Columbia in the U.S. reported mumps infections in 5311 people to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Eight states have reported more than 100 cases this year [2017]: AR, IA, IN, IL, MA, NY, OK, and TX (data from CDC), with about half occurring in Arkansas in a variety of schools, workplaces and colleges. By comparison, in 2010, there were 2612 cases reported to the U.S. CDC, and in 2012, there were 229.Most mumps patients said they had received their 2 recommended doses of the combined measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, according to the CDC. In Arkansas, the state with the largest outbreak, around 70 percent of the mumps patients self-reported that they were fully vaccinated against mumps, according to the CDC.So what's behind the comeback? One factor may be that the vaccine's effectiveness appears to wane over 10 or 15 years, says William Schaffner, an infectious diseases specialist at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Exactly why this year [2017] has been such a large problem, however, climbing to more than 4000 cases, remains a mystery. ""That has all of us puzzled,"" Schaffner says. Vaccination coverage rates in the worst-affected states of Arkansas, Illinois and Iowa are generally high. All have 2-dose coverage rates of around 90 percent or better, according to the CDC.Janell Routh, a medical officer in the CDC's Division of Viral Diseases, says this year's [2017] sudden increase may simply be cyclical. ""We know generally that mumps cases wax and wane over the years. This year, in particular, we know the spike was driven by 3 large outbreaks,"" she says.Scientists agree that mumps outbreaks often occur in crowded environments where people may come into contact with one another's saliva or mucus via things like sharing food or drinks, or kissing. ""The virus is always out there,"" says Paul Offit, a pediatrics professor at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. ""The most likely reason for these outbreaks is that vaccine immunity is fading,"" he says. Routh says the agency still does not have strong enough evidence to answer that type of question. ""We don't know the level of antibody required to stop a case of mumps in a person, so that question of knowing whether the vaccine works less well over time is something we're still working to investigate,"" she says.Other theories to explain the spike do not check out either, according to the CDC. It does not appear that the virus has mutated in a way that would make vaccines less effective against it, Routh says, noting that the main genotype of the virus in the U.S. has remained the same over the past decade. There is also no evidence the virus is being imported by unwitting travelers or students, Routh adds. ""We know the mumps vaccine is only 88 percent effective after 2 doses, so that means a certain portion of vaccinated people are still vulnerable,"" she says, which underscores the possibility the cases could be home-grown. Also, the fact that about 30 percent of mumps cases are asymptomatic makes it difficult to trace outbreaks to one particular person, she says.This winter [2016-2017], the CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices will consider whether or not to recommend a 3rd dose of the vaccine, Routh says. Her agency's guidelines already include administering a 3rd dose of the vaccine during an outbreak. So far, the effectiveness of this has not been established, but the CDC says it is working with college campuses that have had outbreaks in the past to assess the effectiveness of their emergency 3rd-dose campaigns. For now, Schaffner says, parents should check with their pediatricians to make sure their children are up to date on immunizations, and, if they are unsure, they should get their child a 3rd MMR vaccination.(Excerpted and edited from DF Maron. Scientific American. 16 Dec 2016 <https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/whats-behind-the-2016-mumps-spike-in-the-u-s/>.)A map showing the location of Arkansas in the United States can be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/208>. - Mod.LK]
