Lancet Infectious Diseases [edited]<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28161569>Imwong M, Suwannasin K, Kunasol C, et al. The spread of artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium falciparum in the Greater Mekong Subregion: a molecular epidemiology observational study Lancet Infect Dis. 2017. pii: S1473-3099(17)30048-8. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(17)30048-8. [Epub ahead of print]Abstract--------Background:Evidence suggests that the PfKelch13 mutations that confer artemisinin resistance in falciparum malaria have multiple independent origins across the Greater Mekong subregion, which has motivated a regional malaria elimination agenda. We aimed to use molecular genotyping to assess antimalarial drug resistance selection and spread in the Greater Mekong subregion.Methods:In this observational study, we tested Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Myanmar, northeastern Thailand, southern Laos, and western Cambodia for PfKelch13 mutations and for Pfplasmepsin2 gene amplification (indicating piperaquine resistance). We collected blood spots from patients with microscopy or rapid test confirmed uncomplicated falciparum malaria. We used microsatellite genotyping to assess genetic relatedness.Findings:As part of studies on the epidemiology of artemisinin-resistant malaria between [1 Jan 2008], and [31 Dec 2015], we collected 434 isolates. In 2014-15, a single long PfKelch13 C580Y haplotype (-50 to +31‰Û¢5 kb) lineage, which emerged in western Cambodia in 2008, was detected in 65 of 88 isolates from northeastern Thailand, 86 of 111 isolates from southern Laos, and 14 of 14 isolates from western Cambodia, signifying a hard transnational selective sweep. Pfplasmepsin2 amplification occurred only within this lineage, and by 2015 these closely related parasites were found in 10 of the 14 isolates from Cambodia and 15 of 15 isolates from northeastern Thailand. C580Y mutated parasites from Myanmar had a different genetic origin.Interpretation:Our results suggest that the dominant artemisinin-resistant P falciparum C580Y lineage probably arose in western Cambodia and then spread to Thailand and Laos, outcompeting other parasites and acquiring piperaquine resistance. The emergence and spread of fit artemisinin-resistant P falciparum parasite lineages, which then acquire partner drug resistance across the Greater Mekong subregion, threatens regional malaria control and elimination goals. Elimination of falciparum malaria from this region should be accelerated while available antimalarial drugs still remain effective.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The findings of this report have grave implications. They imply that the artemisinin-resistant strains out-compete the artemisinin susceptible strains and that resistance to an alternative drug, piperaquine, is also spreading.It is worth remembering that chloroquine resistance, sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine (Fandidar) and mefloquine resistance all developed in the same counties. It is not known why these countries in South East Asia are a hot-spot for the development of resistance to _P.falciparum_ malaria, but substandard quality of the drugs and suboptimal dosing have been blamed.We fully agree with the conclusion that eradication of malaria should be attempted in these countries as soon as possible to stop further spread of these multi-drug resistant malaria parasites. We have argued that free malaria treatment would be key to free the market from counterfeit drugs and sub-dose treatments. Distribution of free insecticide-impregnated bed nets and indoor residual spraying whenever appropriate would also be helpful. - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/152>.]
