Food Safety News [edited]<http://www.foodsafetynews.com/2017/02/disease-detectives-sickened-by-pulled-pork-at-olympiad-event/#.WJ4XMGczXIV>One of more than 20 events at the Florida Gateway College Science Olympiad this past [Sat 4 Feb 2017], was a competition for ""Disease Detectives.""About 200 students, chaperones, teachers and college faculty members were involved in the Olympiad and after a volunteer-provided lunch, more than 50 became sick enough to be taken -- some by ambulance -- to either the Lake City Medical Center or the Shands Lake Shore Regional Medical Center. All were treated and released, leaving it not to the stricken ""Disease Detectives,"" but state and local health officials to figure out what made the would-be scientists sick. They've now determined the food poisoning was caused by toxin-producing _Staphylococcus aureus_ in pulled pork sandwiches.Florida GateWay College said the Olympiad event was not catered by the college. Food was provided by individuals and organizations involved in the event. The name of the individual or organization that provided the pulled pork was not disclosed. The Columbia County Department of Health led the investigation into the foodborne illness outbreak.Science Olympiad is a 33-year-old organization of science teachers that provides competition in the sciences now involving 7 600 teams from all 50 states. It changes up its annual line-up of events so all disciplines are covered to expose students to all the sciences and career choices.According to the Minnesota Department of Health: ""_S. aureus_ has long been recognized as one of the most important bacteria that cause disease in humans. It is the leading cause of skin and soft tissue infections such as abscesses, (boils) furuncles and cellulitis. Although most staph infections are not serious, _S. aureus_ can cause serious infections such as bloodstream infections, pneumonia, or bone and joint infections.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The following information regarding this entity is extracted from the US Food and Drug Administration's Bad Bug Book available at: <http://www.fda.gov/food/foodborneillnesscontaminants/causesofillnessbadbugbook/ucm070015.htm>:""In the diagnosis of staphylococcal foodborne illness, proper interviews with the victims and the gathering and analyzing of epidemiological data, are essential. Incriminated foods should be collected and examined for staphylococci. The presence of relatively large numbers of enterotoxigenic staphylococci is good circumstantial evidence that the food contains toxin. The most conclusive test is the linking of an illness with a specific food, or, in cases where multiple vehicles exist, the detection of the toxin in the food sample(s).""In cases where the food may have been treated to kill the staphylococci, as in pasteurization or heating, direct microscopic observation of the food may be an aid in the diagnosis. A number of serological methods for determining the enterotoxigenicity of _S. aureus_ isolated from foods, as well as methods for the separation and detection of toxins in foods, have been developed, and used successfully, to aid in the diagnosis of the illness. Phage typing may also be useful when viable staphylococci can be isolated from the incriminated food, from victims, and from suspected carriers, such as food handlers.""A toxin dose of less than 1.0 microgram in contaminated food will produce symptoms of staphylococcal intoxication. This toxin level is reached when _S. aureus_ populations exceed 100 000 per gram.""Foods that are frequently incriminated in staphylococcal food poisoning include meat and meat products; poultry and egg products; salads such as egg, tuna, chicken, potato, and macaroni; bakery products such as cream-filled pastries, cream pies, and chocolate eclairs; sandwich fillings; and milk and dairy products. Foods that require considerable handling during preparation, and that are kept at slightly elevated temperatures after preparation, are frequently involved in staphylococcal food poisoning.""A very short incubation of a vomiting-associated illness (less than 1 hour) also suggests that the etiology might have been heavy metal ingestion. A number of metals can cause this type of syndrome, which is usually caused by the ingestion of a liquid that had been kept in a metallic container. These metals include antimony, copper, tin, and zinc. The illnesses are usually self-limiting and require only symptomatic care. In addition to vomiting, other clues may include the liquid being described as having a metallic taste. Identifying the specific cause requires analysis of the food or liquid vehicle. Some potential differences in the illnesses exist between causes, including a longer incubation period (several hours) for zinc; vomiting and diarrhea for tin; and blue or green vomitus for copper. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/58083>.]
