Indian Express [edited]<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/spurious-food-killed-4-asha-kiran-inmates-autopsy-reports-suggest-4520181/>Post-mortem reports of 4 people who died at Delhi's Asha Kiran home for the mentally challenged suggest that they died of ""food poisoning"" caused by ""spurious food material,"" said an expert. The commission was informed that 11 deaths had occurred in the home in the last 2 months.The 4 reports accessed by The Sunday Express are of inmates who died over a period of 3 months, one each in November and December last year [2016] and 2 this January [2017]. 39 inmates have died at the home in the last 13 months, including 6 in January 2017 alone.The reports reveal the presence of ""froth"" mixed with ""semi-digested food material"" present over the tracheal lumen or the windpipe. The 4 inmates have been described in the reports as ""thin built"" and ""poorly nourished."" Furthermore, the post-mortem examination revealed that some body parts showed ""congestion,"" which experts attributed to ""poisoning of food.""While officials at Dr Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital, which conducted the autopsies, refused to comment, Dr Sudhir Gupta, head of the Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology at AIIMS, said the reports are ""suggestive of poisoning with food due to spurious food material, along with bacterial food poisoning"" and that the cause of death requires a ""huge investigation."" The autopsy reports accessed by The Sunday Express are of victim J, 18, who died on 1 Nov 2016; victim D, 41, who died on 20 Dec 2016; victim T, 20, who died on 29 Jan 2017; and victim G, 21, who died on 17 Jan 2017.Victim J's report, for instance, reads: ""Head: Brain parenchyma was congested; Neck: The larynx, pharynx and tracheal mucosa were congested. White coloured froth mixed with yellow coloured semi digested food material present near the epiglottic fold and in the upper tracheal wall at places; Chest: Lungs were congested... on cut section, blood tinged froth mixed with yellow coloured fluid oozes out; Abdomen: Liver was congested... spleen congested... mucosa of the stomach was congested...both kidneys were congested"".""It is clear from the findings of the report that the deceased were ill nourished. They were not suffering from any disease. The death, in all the cases, based on the circumstantial evidence, is unexplained. However, the post-mortem report has shown congestion and presence of froth. These are indicative of death due to bacterial food poisoning as well as food material being spurious and deleterious to health,"" Gupta told The Sunday Express.The report also states that ""opinion regarding cause of death will be given after receipt of analysis report of specimen preserved."" Sources said that ""subsequent opinion"" will be submitted after at least 2 months. Experts say bacterial food poisoning can typically be attributed to ""poor personal hygiene, improper cleaning of storage and preparation areas and unclean utensils,"" causing contamination of raw and cooked food. ""Food poisoning bacteria are often present in food. There is presence of yellowish-brown semi-digested food material mixed with froth present all over the upper side of the tracheal lumen. This could be the dal served at the home. The present case requires a huge investigation to keep a check on such deaths,"" Gupta said.Government sources said the conditions in Asha Kiran -- which is run by the Delhi government's Department of Social Welfare -- are being viewed as an ""extremely serious matter."" They said Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal had asked the chief secretary to ""remove the deficiencies"" in the home and submit a report by 13 Feb [2017]. Senior police officials said they would conduct an inquiry only if they found foul play or received a criminal complaint from the families of the victims. Joint Commissioner of Police (northern range) Sanjay Singh said, ""The probe into these deaths is being conducted by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate (SDM). We will assist them by collecting the post-mortem report and sending it to the executive magistrate. The final report will come after the SDM concludes the inquiry.""Another police officer who claims to have visited the home several times said the place was ""full of dirt"" and ""filled with stench. We asked welfare officials and employees of the home to maintain hygiene, but nothing changed,"" he said. Earlier this month [February 2017], the Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) chairperson Swati Maliwal had led a surprise inspection of the home and observed that the premises had ""dirty toilets, nude inmates, and mentally challenged persons crawling on the floor."" On Saturday [11 Feb 2017], Maliwal told The Sunday Express that the home did not have a designated cook. ""It was the house aunty (attendant) who cooked. The job of the house aunty is to take care of the women and assist them in going to the toilet, not cook. In one dormitory, there was one house aunty for 153 inmates.""[Byline: Alok Singh]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The post mortem descriptions sound not specific, as congestion can occur for a number of reasons. Froth in the trachea can also occur for a number of reasons.Clearly, this home is in disrepair, lacking management and lacking safety and hygiene standards. The description makes it sound like horrible place.If there have been this many cases -- 11 in the past 2 months -- why has an investigation not occurred? Why have corrections of deficiencies not occurred? Fake food? If they have seen this before, then why do they not have an idea as to what is going on. There are multiple articles on the web regarding plastic rice, which can have very detrimental effects in the body. But the food source is not mentioned.There are many things in this article that raise red flags in my mind. We can only hope they get an accurate diagnosis and take steps to correct the problems. Hopefully, this sad situation will get cleaned up and straightened out. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/142>.]
