WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update - 282 (based on data up to 22 Jan 2017)--------------------------------------------------------Summary-------Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere continued to increase, with many countries especially in East Asia and Europe having passed their seasonal threshold early in comparison with previous years. Worldwide, influenza A(H3N2) virus was predominant. The majority of influenza viruses characterized so far were similar antigenically to the reference viruses contained in vaccines for use in the 2016-2017 northern hemisphere influenza season. All tested viruses collected recently for antiviral sensitivity were susceptible to the neuraminidase inhibitor antiviral medications.- In North America, influenza activity with A(H3N2) virus predominating continued to increase in the United States of America, whereas in Canada and Mexico, influenza activity decreased.- In Europe, influenza activity remained high, and has peaked already in some countries, with influenza A (H3N2) virus being the most prominent subtype. Persons aged over 65 years were most frequently associated with severe disease from influenza infection.- In East Asia, high influenza activity continued to be reported with influenza A(H3N2) viruses predominant.- In Western Asia, influenza and ILI [influenza-like illness] activity appeared to be decreasing in Armenia, Georgia, Israel, and Iraq. Influenza A(H3N2) was the most frequently detected virus, followed by influenza B virus.- In Southern Asia influenza activity remained low in most of the countries, with influenza A (H3N2) virus predominant, and low levels of influenza A(H1N1) and influenza B viruses present.- In South East Asia, influenza activity remained low, with influenza A(H3N2) virus and influenza B predominating in the region.- In Northern Africa, influenza activity was reported in Algeria and Morocco with influenza A(H3N2) and influenza B virus detections.- In West Africa, influenza B continued to be detected in Ghana.- In the Caribbean countries and Central America, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained low in general. Puerto Rico and Costa Rica however reported an increase of ILI and influenza activity, respectively.- In tropical South America, influenza and other respiratory viruses activity remained low.- In temperate South America, influenza and RSV activity remained low in most of the countries. In Paraguay, ILI activity increased above expected levels but no influenza activity was reported.- In the temperate zone of the Southern Hemisphere, influenza activity was at inter-seasonal levels.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 81 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 9 Jan 2017 to 22 Jan 2017 (data as of 3 Feb 2017 03:50:45 UTC). The WHO GISRS [Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System] laboratories tested more than 159276 specimens during that time period. 40 570 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 38 581 (95.1 percent) were typed as influenza A and 1989 (4.9 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 294 (1.8 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 16121 (98.2 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 186 (60.4 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 122 (39.6 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[According to the recent update, influenza activity has increased in North America, Europe, and East Asia, with influenza A(H3N2) viruses predominant. However, influenza activity has been low in the Caribbean, Central America, and West Africa. In South Asia and South east Asia, influenza activity has also been low, with influenza B viruses in circulation along with influenza A(H3N2) and low levels of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09. Apart from recent reports of many human cases of avian influenza A/H7N9 cases from China, no novel viruses have been reported during this period. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/8854>.]
