Emerging Infectious Diseases (in press) [edited]<https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/23/4/16-1987_article>Acute Tetraplegia Caused by Rat Bite Fever in Snake Keeper and Transmission of Streptobacillus moniliformis-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Human infections by _Streptobacillus moniliformis_ are assumed to be caused by rats on the basis of epidemiologic information. We provide genotyping-based evidence for infection with the same bacterial strain in rat and human samples and highlight diagnostic difficulties concerning this microorganism and its potential for life-threatening consequences.A 59-year-old man was admitted to Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Tours (Tours, France) because he was unable to stand and had acute progressive onset of dyspnea and a 15-day history of fever and arthralgia (left knee, right wrist) but no signs of rash. He was sedated, mechanically ventilated, and admitted to the intensive care unit. The patient had a temperature of 39å¡C (102.2å¡F), a pulse rate of 63 beats/min, and a blood pressure of 126/68 mm Hg. After discontinuation of sedation, physical examination showed cervical pain, flaccid tetraplegia, and sensitivity at the T4 level. His knees and left wrist were swollen and had joint effusions. There was little available information for the patient because he could not speak and had no known social contacts. Blood tests showed an increased leukocyte count predominantly neutrophils, and an increased C-reactive protein level (125 mg/L).The patient was given antimicrobial drugs (amoxicillin and cloxacillin) after blood and synovia (knee) sampling. Cervical magnetic resonance imaging showed C5-T1 vertebral osteomyelitis and an epidural abscess with consecutive compression of the spinal cord (C5-T1). Surgical spinal decompression and vertebral stabilization were not attempted because of extensiveness of injury and flaccid tetraplegia. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms showed no features of endocarditis. Blood cultures showed negative results. Joint effusions contained a culture-negative inflammatory liquid and uric acid crystals. The patient was given a tracheotomy and continuously ventilated. A final diagnosis was obtained by sequencing the 16S rRNA gene obtained directly from synovia. An 897-nt partial 16S rRNA sequence showed 99.0 percent identity with sequences of _S. moniliformis_ (GenBank accession nos. JQ087393 and CP001779).The patient was a snake keeper who bred rats for snake food. He reported snake bites but not rat bites. We sampled his snakes (Boa constrictor and _Elaphe sp._) and one of his feeder rats (_Rattus norvegicus_) by obtaining swab and biopsy specimens from oral cavities of all animals. All cultures were polymicrobial. We used desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (Bruker Daltonique, Wissembourg, France) to identify isolated bacteria but failed to identify _S. moniliformis_.Synovia and serum samples from the patient and oral swab and biopsy specimens from animals were subjected to 3 16S rRNA gene-based PCRs that were genus specific, rather than S. moniliformis specific (1). Synovia from the patient and 2 swab and 2 biopsy specimens from the same rat, but none of the oral samples from snakes, were positive. This result suggested rat bite fever. However, diagnosis of rat bite fever on the basis of partial 16S rRNA gene sequencing might be uncertain (1).We tested the same samples by using _S. moniliformis_-specific multilocus variant analysis (MLVA) (2) to identify the bacterial transmission chain. Results were consistent with those for PCR and identified 2 MLVA genotypes of _S. moniliformis_ in rat oral samples. Conversely, genomic information obtained for human synovia showed only one of these patterns, indicating a clonal relationship with one of the rat bacterial strains. Serum from the patient obtained on day one after hospitalization contained antibodies against _S. moniliformis_ when tested by bead-based multiplex serologic analysis and indirect immunofluorescence.Rat bite fever [RBF] is an underdiagnosed worldwide zoonosis closely associated with bites of rats or close contact with them. Snakes that eat rats might serve, at least temporarily, as reservoirs for human infection. Thus, we attempted to detect the rat bite fever organism in oral and biopsy specimens from the patient's snakes by using different PCRs (including a quantitative PCR that has an analytical sensitivity of 10 DNA molecules). All results were negative.A total of 4 studies reported rat bite fever associated with keeping reptiles, but definitive transmission could not be proven in these instances, in which infections seemed more likely to be introduced by feeder rats (3-6). Regular contact with prey rats might be a general risk factor, and being bitten by a snake shortly after it fed on a prey rat might have the same consequences as a rat bite. In our study, we identified and typed the involved clone by using a recently developed, species-specific, culture-independent MLVA scheme (<http://microbesgenotyping.i2bc.paris-saclay.fr/databases/public>).We showed that a rat might be simultaneously colonized by >1 clone of _S. moniliformis_ and demonstrated identical strains in the human patient and the reservoir host. The infectious genotype has been designated as LHL18 on the basis of the novel allele combination 17-3-16.We demonstrated the presence of an identical characteristic _S. moniliformis_ bacterial pattern in rat and human samples, which validated genotyping-based evidence for infection with the same strain. Our case highlights diagnostic difficulties concerning this microorganism and supports tropism of this bacteria for synovial tissue and its potential for life-threatening consequencesReferences----------1. Eisenberg T, Ewers C, Rau J, Akimkin V, Nicklas W: Approved and novel strategies in diagnostics of rat bite fever and other Streptobacillus infections in humans and animals. Virulence. 2016;7:630-648.2. Eisenberg T, Fawzy A, Nicklas W, Semmler T, Ewers C: Phylogenetic and comparative genomics of the family Leptotrichiaceae and introduction of a novel fingerprinting MLVA for Streptobacillus moniliformis. BMC Genomics. 2016;17:864.3. Dendle C, Woolley IJ, Korman TM: Rat-bite fever septic arthritis: illustrative case and literature review. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2006;25:791-797.4. Gilroy SA, Khan MU: Rat bite fever: case report and review of the literature. Infect Dis Clin Pract. 2002;11:403-405.5. Irvine L, Wills T: Streptobacillus moniliformis: a mouse trying to become a rat. Clin Microbiol Newsl. 2006;28:118-120.6. Trigo-Daporta M, Cortizo-Vidal S, PallarÌ©s-GonzÌÁlez Ì , GarcÌ a-Campello M: [Fever and rash in the owner of exotic pets] [in Spanish]. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2011;29:311-312.[Authors: Eisenberg T, Poignant S, Jouan Y, et al]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The paralysis in this case was caused by presumed bacteremic spread to the vertebral colum and then local spread to the epidural space causing pressure on the spinal cord.This organism is part of the normal oral flora of the rat just as other potential human pathogens such as _Pasteurella multocida_ and _Capnocytophaga canimorsus_ are part of the normal oral flora of cats and dogs respectively. Zoonoses from pets are a fact of life, whether from a rat, an iguana, a turtle, or a dog or cat.The following is extracted from MMWR 2005; 53(51 & 52): 1198-202 (<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5351a2.htm>) regarding fatalities with rat bite fever in adults:Although rapidly fatal pediatric cases of RBF have been described previously (2,3), similar mortality among adults has not been reported. Mortality attributed to severe systemic complications (such as, endocarditis, myocarditis, meningitis, pneumonia, or multiple organ failure) has been documented in certain adult patients (1,4). Both patients described in this report [MMWR report above] died within 12 hours of presentation, allowing little opportunity for assessment and treatment. These case reports demonstrate that infection with _S. moniliformis_ can cause fulminant sepsis and death in previously healthy adults. As a result, prevention of severe disease might depend on increasing the awareness of appropriate risk-reduction activities and possible symptoms of RBF among persons who have exposure to rats. Intravenous penicillin is the treatment of choice, and prompt therapy can prevent severe complications (1). Because rapid laboratory confirmation of infection with _S. moniliformis_ might not be possible, clinicians should consider initiating empiric therapy for patients with a compatible clinical presentation and exposure history.Clinicians should consider RBF in the differential diagnosis for unexplained febrile illness or sepsis in patients reporting rat exposure. Initial symptoms might be nonspecific, but a maculopapular rash and septic arthritis commonly develop (1,5). However, as demonstrated by the cases in this report, patients can have severe disease before the onset of typical symptoms. Despite its name, approximately 30 percent of patients with RBF do not report having been bitten or scratched by a rat (1,5). Risk factors for RBF include handling rats at home and in the workplace (such as, laboratories or pet stores). RBF is rare in the USA, with only a few cases documented each year (1, 6 ,7). However, because RBF is not a nationally notifiable disease, its actual incidence has not been well described.In the cases described here [MMWR report above], diagnosis of RBF was delayed in part because of the inability to rapidly isolate or identify _Streptobacillus moniliformis_. If infection with _S. moniliformis_ is suspected, specific media and incubation conditions should be used (8) (See Box at source URL above). In the absence of a positive culture, identification of pleomorphic Gram negative bacilli in appropriate specimens might support a preliminary diagnosis (1). In the event of an unexplained death in a person with rat exposure, performing an autopsy might also be critical to identifying an etiology.Because of the high prevalence of colonization and asymptomatic infection with _S. moniliformis_ among rodents, testing and treatment of rats is not practical. Disease prevention should center on risk reduction among persons with frequent rat exposure. Adherence to simple precautions while handling rats can reduce the risk for RBF and other potential rodent-borne zoonotic infections, wound infections, and injuries. Persons should wear gloves, practice regular hand washing, and avoid hand-to-mouth contact when handling rats or cleaning rat cages (1,9). If bitten by a rat, persons should promptly clean and disinfect the wound, seek medical attention, and report their exposure history. A tetanus toxoid booster should be administered if more than 10 years have lapsed since the last dose (9,10).References----------1. Washburn RG: _Streptobacillus moniliformis_ (rat-bite fever). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2000: 2422-2424.2. McHugh TP, Bartlett RL, Raymond JI: Rat-bite fever: report of a fatal case. Ann Emerg Med 1985; 14: 1116-11183. Sens MA, Brown EW, Wilson LR, Crocker TP: Fatal _Streptobacillus moniliformis_ infection in a two-month-old infant. Am J Clin Pathol 1989; 91: 612-6164. Shvartsblat SS, Kochie M, Harber P, Howard J: Fatal rat bite fever in a pet shop employee. Am J Ind Med 2004; 45: 357-3605. Graves MH, Janda MJ: Rat-bite fever (_Streptobacillus moniliformis_): a potential emerging disease. Int J Infect Dis 2001; 5: 151-1556. CDC. Rat bite fever in a college student -- California. MMWR 1984; 33: 318-207. CDC. Rat-bite fever -- New Mexico, 1996. MMWR 1998; 47: 89-918. Weyant RS, Moss CW, Weaver RE, et al: Identification of unusual pathogenic gram-negative aerobic and facultatively anaerobic bacteria. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: The Williams & Wilkins Co; 1996.9. National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians. Compendium of measures to prevent disease and injury associated with animals in public settings. St Paul, MN: National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians; 2004; available at <https://doh.sd.gov/diseases/assets/AnimalsPublicSettings.pdf>.10. Weber EJ, Callaham ML. Mammalian bites. In: Marx JA, Hockenberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds. Rosen's emergency medicine: concepts and clinical practice. 5th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2002: 775-785. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/100>.]
