Sai Gon Giai Phong [edited]<http://www.saigon-gpdaily.com.vn/Health/2017/2/123140/>Test results showed that methanol-tainted alcohol is the cause behind the mass food poisoning killing 7 people and hospitalizing 31 others in the northern mountainous province of Lai Chau earlier this week, the Vietnam Food Administration under the Ministry of Health said yesterday [Wed 15 Feb 2017].As per the Ministry of Health's tests, the 3 samples of alcohol have the methanol concentration of 970 mg/l; 556 000 mg/l and 475 000 mg/l respectively. The methanol concentration in wine samples has exceeded the regulation of methanol in alcohol; accordingly, methanol has been identified as the cause of mass poisoning.In order to help Lai Chau health sector in treatment of victims, Bach Mai Hospital in Hanoi sent experts to the province. Deputy Head of the Department of Health in Lai Chau Province Dr Do Van Glang said that more than 30 residents are being treated in local infirmaries.Medical workers of the province's General Hospital have made all efforts to treat 13 severe patients who are on ventilators and hemodialysis while less severely affected patients are in the infirmary in Phong Tho District are under close observation.[Byline: Nguyen Quoc]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Methanol toxicity initially lacks severe toxic manifestations. Its pathophysiology represents a classic example of ""lethal synthesis"" in which toxic metabolites cause fatality after a characteristic latent period.Methanol is sometimes used as an ethanol substitute for alcohol. However, foods such as fresh fruits and vegetables, fruit juices, fermented beverages, and diet soft drinks containing aspartame are the primary sources of methanol in the human body, but are in very minute quantities.Wood alcohol is also known as methanol. It is a commonly used toxic organic solvent causing metabolic acidosis, neurologic issues, and death, when ingested. It is a part of many commercial industrial solvents and of adulterated alcoholic beverages or is mistaken as being the same as alcohol for ingestion. Methanol toxicity remains a common problem in many parts of the developing world, especially among members of lower socioeconomic classes.Neurological complications are recognized more frequently, due to advanced technologies and because of early recognition of the toxicity and advances in supportive care. Hemodialysis and better management of acid-base disturbances remain the most important therapeutic improvements.Serum methanol levels of greater than 20 mg/dL correlate with ocular injury. Funduscopic changes are notable within only a few hours after methanol ingestion. The mechanism by which the methanol causes toxicity to the visual system is not well understood. Formic acid, the toxic metabolite of methanol, is regarded as being responsible for ocular toxicity and blindness can occur in humans.The prognosis in methanol poisoning correlates with the amount of methanol consumed and the subsequent degree of metabolic acidosis; more severe acidosis confers a poorer prognosis. Methanol has a relatively low toxicity. The adverse effects are thought to be from the accumulation of formic acid, a metabolite of methanol metabolism. The prognosis is further dependent on the amount of formic acid that has accumulated in the blood, with a direct correlation existing between the formic acid concentration and morbidity and mortality. Little long-term improvement can be expected in patients with neurologic complications.The minimal lethal dose of methanol in adults is believed to be 1 mg/kg of body weight. The exact rates of morbidity and mortality from methanol intoxication are not available.Rapid, early treatment is necessary for survival, but sequelae such as blindness may be permanent.Metabolic acidosis in methanol poisoning may necessitate the administration of bicarbonate and assisted ventilation. Bicarbonate potentially may reverse visual deficits. In addition, bicarbonate may help to decrease the amount of active formic acid.Antidote therapy, often using ethanol or fomepizole, is directed towards delaying methanol metabolism until the methanol is eliminated from the patient's system either naturally or via dialysis. Like methanol, ethanol is metabolized by ADH, but the enzyme's affinity for ethanol is 10-20 times higher than it is for methanol. Fomepizole is also metabolized by ADH; however, its use is limited because of high cost and lack of availability.Hemodialysis can easily remove methanol and formic acid. Indications for this procedure include (1) greater than 30 mL of methanol ingested, (2) serum methanol level greater than 20 mg/dL, (3) observation of visual complications, and (4) no improvement in acidosis despite repeated sodium bicarbonate infusions.Intravenous administration of ethanol in a 10 percent dextrose solution may be helpful. As ethanol prolongs the elimination half-life of methanol, the treatment may take several days, and the patient should be hospitalized. Dialysis may be necessary to prevent kidney failure as well. Hemodialysis remains an effective treatment.Portions of this comment were extracted from:<http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1174890-overview>,<http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1174890-treatment>,<https://www.nap.edu/read/4795/chapter/35>, and<https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/ershdb/emergencyresponsecard_29750029.html>. - Mod.TG]
