Shanghai Daily [edited]<http://www.shanghaidaily.com/nation/Guangxi-reports-one-H7N9-fatality/shdaily.shtml>A Woman infected with the H7N9 strain of bird flu in south China's Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region has died.The patient, a 41-year-old woman with the surname [L], died around 8 a.m. [Sun 19 Feb 2017] in Nanning, the capital of Guangxi, the regional Health and Family Planning Commission said.According to the commission, [L], who worked as a live poultry saleswoman, had complained of a fever and cough on [Sat 11 Feb 2017]. She was hospitalized on [Thu 16 Feb 2017] and tests on [Sat 18 Feb 2017] confirmed she had contracted the disease.None of those who had close contact with the woman have shown signs of infection. The commission has taken measures to prevent the spread of the disease.H7N9 was 1st reported to have infected humans in China in March 2013. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Qingdao - Imported CaseDate: Sun 19 Feb 2017Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited]<http://www.flu.org.cn/en/news_detail?action=ql&uid=MjI0OA&pd=YXRsbXBw&newsId=19083>Qingdao reported an imported human H7N9 AIV case from nearby Rizhao city on [Sun 19 Feb 2017]. The 48-year-old female patient, surname [S], resident of Dashenzhuang village of Dongguan town of Ju county, Rizhao city. She had onset of symptoms on [Sun 12 Feb 2017] with fever (39.5å¡C), [103.1å¡F], as no improvement of her condition in local clinic with treatment of intravenous infusion for 2 days, she was transferred to the county hospital. She was later transferred from Ju county to Qingdao Qilu university hospital for treatment on [Sat 18 Feb 2017] and was diagnosed as human H7N9 AIV case on the morning of [Sun 19 Feb 2017]. According to the local authority in her residency, she raised around 100 chickens in her home and 4~5 chickens died in recent week. This is the 5th human H7N9 AIV case in Shandong province since 2017. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Yunan - Response activitiesDate: Mon 20 Feb 2017Source: GoKunming [edited]<http://www.gokunming.com/en/blog/item/3895/two_die_from_avian_flu_in_yunnans_first_cases_of_the_year>Reports of 2 flu-related fatalities in Yunnan over the past few weeks have once again raised awareness of, and concern about, the bird-flu virus. As news of the deaths broke, provincial officials were quick in their attempts to quell any possible public alarm, issuing statements on radio, television and print media stressing the situation was completely under control and people had ""no reason to panic"".In general, the government reaction appears warranted regarding the H7N9 avian influenza virus. Yunnan has reportedly experienced a total of only 2 bird flu infections since the beginning of 2017, both of which unfortunately led to death. The 2 victims were a young woman and her 3-year-old daughter.The pair of Kunming residents and their family spent the Spring Festival holiday in eastern China's Jiangxi province, and during the visit had contact with domesticated poultry, according to a report issued by the Yunnan Health and Family Planning Commission (YHFPC). The mother fell ill first, but eventually passed away 2 weeks after contracting the virus. Her daughter died a week later.Doctor Wei Jia, an expert on infectious diseases at YHFPC, has appeared in public service announcements describing the illness. In an interview he explained family members and close friends of the victims have all been tested, with none testing positive for H7N9. Furthermore, says the doctor, the screenings produced no evidence of human-to-human transmission, which is a crucial distinction when considering possible large-scale outbreaks.Chinese health authorities say the country experienced 192 cases of human H7N9 infection in the month of January [2017], 79 of them proving fatal. Those numbers represent a slight increase over December [2016]. The provinces of the Pearl and Yangtze river deltas -- specifically Zhejiang, Hunan and Guangdong -- have been hardest hit, and combine to claim the majority of total instances.In response, many cities in those 3 regions, as well as Sichuan and Anhui, have temporarily banned sales of live poultry. Yunnan authorities have not considered such a move, largely because no indigenous H7N9 cases have been documented in the province.Instead, health officials here are urging a calm and rational response, suggesting people wash their hands regularly with hot water and soap, cover their mouths when coughing or sneezing, exercise regularly and sleep more than usual. In the words of Dr Wei in his public service announcement, ""H7N9 has been in China since 2013 and does have pathogenic characteristics...But it is entirely preventable"".--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] WHO UpdateDate: Mon 20 Feb 2017Source: Disease outbreak news [DONs] [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/20-february-2017-ah7n9-china/en/>Human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus - China----------------------------------------------------------Between [Thu 19 Jan and 14 Feb 2017], a total of 304 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection have been reported to WHO from mainland China though the China National IHR focal point.On 19 January 2017, the National Health and Family Planning Commission of China (NHFPC) notified WHO of 111 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. On 24 January 2017, the NHFPC notified WHO of 31 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. On 30 January 2017, the NHFPC notified WHO of 41 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. On 7 February 2017, the NHFPC notified WHO of 52 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. On 14 February 2017, the NHFPC notified WHO of 69 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus.Details of the cases--------------------Between [Thu 19 Jan and 14 Feb 2017], the NHFPC reported a total of 304 human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9). Onset dates range from 13 December 2016 to 9 February 2017. Of these 304 cases, 86 are female (28 percent). Cases range in age from 3 to 85 years, with a median age of 58 years. The cases are reported from Jiangsu (67), Zhejiang (53), Guangdong (32), Anhui (31), Jiangxi (27), Hunan (26), Fujian (20), Hubei (20), Sichuan (6), Guizhou (4), Henan (4), Shandong (4), Shanghai (3), Liaoning (2), Yunnan (2), Beijing (1), Hebei (1), and Guangxi (1).At the time of notification, there were 36 deaths, 2 cases had mild symptoms and 82 cases were diagnosed as either pneumonia (34) or severe pneumonia (48). The clinical presentations of the other 184 cases are not available at this time. A total of 144 cases reported exposure to poultry or live poultry market, 11 cases have no clear exposure to poultry or poultry-related environments. Up to 149 cases are under investigation.Two clusters of two-person were reported: - A 22-year-old female (mother of 3-year-old girl case who had symptom onset on 29 January 2017, died on 7 February 2017) reported from Yunnan province. She had developed symptom on 4 February 2017. She took care of her daughter during her daughter was sick. Both are reported to expose to poultry in Jiangxi province.  - A 45-year-old female (previously reported on 9 January [2017]) from Sihui city, Guangdong province. She had symptom onset on 17 December 2016, and died on 24 December 2016. She was exposed to poultry. Another case was a 43-year-old female from Guangzhou city, Guangdong province. She had symptom onset on 30 December 2016 and was admitted to hospital on the same day. She is the sister of the 45-year old female described above. She took care of her hospitalized sister but also had exposure to poultry. At the time of reporting, she was suffering from pneumonia.While common exposure to poultry is likely, human-to-human transmission cannot be ruled out.To date, a total of 1222 laboratory-confirmed human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported through IHR notification since early 2013.Public health response----------------------Considering the increase in the number of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) since December 2016, the Chinese government has enhanced measures such as: - Strengthened early diagnosis and early treatment, treatment of severe cases to reduce occurrence of severe cases and deaths. - Convened meetings to further deploy prevention and control measures. - Conducted public risk communication and sharing information with the public. - The NHFPC strengthened epidemic surveillance, conducted timely risk assessment and analyzed the information for any changes in epidemiology. - The NHFPC requested local NHFPCs to implement effective control measures on the source of outbreaks and to minimize the number of affected people. - The NHFPC, joined by other departments such as agriculture, industry and commerce, Food and Drug Administration, re-visited Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Anhui and Guangdong provinces where more cases occurred for joint supervision. The affected provinces have also strengthened multisectoral supervision, inspection and guidance on local surveillance, medical treatment, prevention and control and promoted control measures with a focus on live poultry market management control. - Relevant prefectures in Jiangsu province have closed live poultry markets in late December 2016 and Zhejiang, Guangdong and Anhui provinces have strengthened live poultry market regulations.WHO risk assessment-------------------While similar sudden increases in the number of human avian influenza A(H7N9) cases identified have been reported in previous years the number of cases reported during this season is exceeding previous seasons. The number of human cases with onset from 1 October 2016 accounts for nearly one-third of all the human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus infection reported since 2013.However, human infections with the avian influenza A(H7N9) virus remain unusual. Close observation of the epidemiological situation and further characterization of the most recent human viruses are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures timely.Most human cases are exposed to avian influenza A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, and live poultry vending continues, further human cases can be expected. Additional sporadic human cases may be also expected in previously unaffected provinces, as it is likely that this virus circulates in poultry of other areas of China without being detected.Although small clusters of human cases with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported including those involving healthcare workers, current epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. Therefore the likelihood of further community level spread is considered low.WHO advice----------WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid, if possible, poultry farms, contact with animals in live bird markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water, and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling in or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and influenza-like illness (ILI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Cases continue to be reported on an almost daily basis.  The observation that there have been 304 case reported in a one month period (although the cases dates of onset ranged over a 6 week period) is cause for concern.  One can't help but wonder if the time hasn't arrived to shut down all wet markets at least during the influenza season. The HealthMap/ProMED map of China can be found at <China: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>.  A map of China showing provinces can be found at <- Mod.MPP******[5] Vaccine TrialsDate: Mon 20 Feb 2017 08:32Source: Ecns.cn [edited]<http://www.ecns.cn/2017/02-20/246004.shtml.>A total of 2 human cases of H7N9 virus have been reported in the capital this year [2017]. Up to 4 kinds of vaccine for the H7N9 strain of bird flu virus have been approved for clinical trials by China's top drug regulator, according to the Beijing Food and Drug Administration.The administration will continue to provide assistance and guidance for clinical trials of the vaccines so they can enter the market as soon as possible, it said in a statement last week [week of 12 Feb 2017].Beijing Tiantan Biological Products Co, a State-owned enterprise in Beijing, which developed the vaccines, announced on [Wed 15 Feb 2017] that the China Food and Drug Administration had approved clinical trials. The company added that it must conduct other procedures after the completion of clinical trials before the vaccines can be sold on the market, including applying for registration of the drugs and acquiring certificates for their manufacture from the CFDA.There are currently no vaccines for the H7N9 strain of bird flu--which is most active in winter and spring--available on the market in China or overseas, although several other domestic companies have also acquired approval from CFDA for clinical trials for similar products, Beijing Tiantan said.A total of 2 human cases of H7N9 have been reported in Beijing this year [2017], with both patients suspected of having been exposed to live poultry markets. Both are in critical condition, the Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention said last week [week of 12 Feb 2017].A 41-year-old woman infected with the H7N9 strain of bird flu in Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region, died on [Sun 18 Feb 2017], the regional Health and Family Planning Commission said.The central government has intensified measures to control the spread of H7N9, including shutting down live poultry markets, according to the National Health and Family Planning Commission. The commission called on the public to take precautionary measures such as avoiding contact with live poultry and cooking chicken meat thoroughly.Human cases of H7N9 have been reported in 16 provinces in China since October, including in Yunnan, Fujian, Hubei and Hunan provinces, with most of them involving exposure to live poultry markets, according to the commission.In January [2017] alone, 192 human cases of H7N9 were reported on the Chinese mainland, including 79 deaths, making it the worst period since the virus first appeared in China in 2013, the commission said.There is no evidence to support sustained human-to-human transmission of the virus, which was 1st reported in the spring of 2013, according to the World Health Organization.The Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention said last week [week of 12 Feb 2017] that more sporadic cases are expected in the city.Sporadic cases of the bird flu may last until late April [2017], said Ni Daxin, deputy director of emergency response at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The report above does not specify whether the candidate vaccines are intended for poultry or humans trials. Currently, there is no vaccine available to protect against this virus. However, certain reverse genetics based candidate human vaccine strains and reference antigens for A/H7N9 have  been  developed  with  support  from  WHO  Collaborating Centres   (CCs)  and Essential  Regulatory  Laboratories  (ERLs) of the  Global  Influenza  Surveillance  and  Response  System  (GISRS) that advise the WHO as part of the influenza vaccine virus selection and development process[<http://www.who.int/influenza/vaccines/virus/candidates_reagents/summary_a_h7n9_cvv_20160229.pdf?ua=1>][6] Taipei , TaiwanDate;22 Feb 2017Source: Disease outbreak news<http://www.who.int/csr/don/22-february-2017-ah7n9-china/en/>On 4 February 2017, Taipei Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported one laboratory-confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. This is the fifth human case with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus reported from Taipei CDC.Details of the caseThe patient, a 69-year-old male travelled to Yangjiang City, Guangdong Province, China from 18 September 2016 to 25 January 2017. He developed fever and chills on 23 January 2017 while in Guangdong. On 25 January 2017, the patient returned to Taiwan, China and visited the emergency room. During the medical consultation, neither fever nor pneumonia was detected and a rapid test for influenza on an oropharyngeal sample was negative. PCR testing of additional samples was obtained the next day and tested negative for avian influenza A viruses.On 1 February 2017, he visited the emergency room again due to fever, productive cough and dyspnoea. Bilateral pneumonia was diagnosed and he was then intubated due to respiratory failure. On 2 February 2017, additional sputum samples were collected and were positive for avian influenza A(H7N9) virus.Contact tracing following the detection of this case revealed that two of six of his colleagues in mainland China had upper respiratory symptoms which resolved after treatment. Two family members of the case have been asymptomatic at the time of reporting.No source of exposure to the avian influenza A(H7N9) virus has been identified thus far for this patient. He denied any exposure to live birds or live poultry markets during his stay in Guangdong province. The patient also denied exposure to others with suspicious illnesses. He remained at home or in the hospital after returning to Taiwan, China.To date, a total of 1223 laboratory-confirmed human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported through IHR notification since early 2013.This total number of cases includes five (5) cases reported from Taipei CDC, 20 cases reported from Hong Kong CHP, one (1) case reported from Macau SAR, two (2) cases reported from Canada and one (1) case reported from Malaysia.Public health responseResponse measures have been taken by Taipei CDC such as:Carrying out epidemiological investigations, close contact tracing, management and medical observations.Strengthening surveillance of pneumonia with unknown causes, routine influenza sentinel surveillance, as well as flu and avian flu virology surveillance.The travel history of the case has been sent to the National Health and Family Planning Commission of China for further investigation.The agriculture department in Taiwan, China has been conducting wild bird and poultry surveillance for avian influenza routinely since 1997. Avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses were detected in wild birds in 2015, but based on phylogenetic analysis, these viruses differed from the avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses currently infecting poultry in mainland China with spillover infections in humans exposed to these infected birds.WHO risk assessmentWhile similar sudden increases in the number of human avian influenza A(H7N9) cases identified have been reported in previous years the number of cases reported during this season is exceeding previous seasons. The number of human cases with onset from 1 October 2016 accounts for nearly one-third of all the human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus infection reported since 2013.However, human infections with the avian influenza A(H7N9) virus remain unusual. Close observation of the epidemiological situation and further characterization of the most recent human viruses are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures timely.Most human cases are exposed to avian influenza A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, and live poultry vending continues, further human cases can be expected. Additional sporadic human cases may be also expected in previously unaffected provinces as it is likely that this virus circulates in poultry of other areas of China without being detected.Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.Although small clusters of human cases with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported including those involving healthcare workers, current epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. Therefore the likelihood of further community level spread is considered low.WHO adviceWHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid, if possible, poultry farms, contact with animals in live bird markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water, and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling in or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and influenza-like illness (ILI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[7] Risk of H7N9 spreadDate: 21 Feb 2017Source: The Street/South China Morning Post[edited]<https://www.thestreet.com/story/14010607/2/bird-flu-affecting-half-of-china-controllable-but-may-spread-further.html.>Bird flu affecting half of China: 'controllable' but may spread further National health commission puts provincial authorities on alert as thecountry grapples with its worst outbreak of the deadly bird flu strain. Chinese health authorities have issued stern warnings over the H7N9 bird flu outbreak in the last two days, admitting the situation had already affected half of the country and could lead to even more fatalities.Since January, human deaths and infections from H7N9 have been reported in 16 provinces and municipalities, according to the National Health and Family Planning Commission.Beijing joins list of mainland cities reporting bird flu cases in humans. While the situation was still ""preventable and controllable"", the commissionwarned in a statement on Tuesday that if the situation was not tightly controlled the virus could spread further.bThe virus had killed at least 87 people by February 12, including 79 in January.It is the highest death toll since the first known human infection in 2013,and most of the cases have been in the Pearl and Yangtze River delta areas.vIn the previous three years, January's death toll had ranged between 20 and 31.The commission's statement came one day after it warned provincial health authorities across the country, including Xinjiang and Tibet, of the risksof the latest H7N9 outbreak. Local authorities were ordered to make ""utmost effort"" to contain the disease and minimise deaths.The World Health Organisation said there were no signs of sustained human-to-human transmission in bird flu cases this year, but it would remain ""vigilant"" over the puzzling outbreak in which affected poultry did not show any symptoms.The strength of the outbreak has spurred authorities in central and southern China to close poultry markets. Earlier this month, Zhejiang shut down its live poultry markets. Some cities in Jiangsu have banned live poultry trade as well.In addition, Guangdong province has suspended the sale of poultry from high-risk areas in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Anhui and Jiangxi, and ordered each city to restrict the live poultry trade.In Guangzhou, where H7N9 was detected at 30 per cent of live poultry markets, sales have been suspended since Thursday, with the ban remaining in place until the end of the month.The order appears to have been enforced to an unprecedented extent in the city, where residents have a strong preference for buying live chickens over frozen ones.Taiwan culls 150,000 poultry following bird flu outbreak across island  ""It is really strict this year. Vendors secretly sold live chickens whenthere was a similar ban before, but not this time,"" one vegetable vendor at a wet market in Guangzhou's downtown Yuexiu district said.Guangzhou resident Zhang å Jiehong, 47, said fear of catching the virus stopped her from going to a wet market unless absolutely necessary.""I've caught a cold and I have elderly people at home. I don't want to catch something in the market,"" Zhang said.The commission said contact with H7N9-infected poultry or exposure at a market with live poultry were high risk factors and shutting down such markets had proved effective.[Additional reporting by Mimi Lau]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[In view of the WHO update  dated 20 Feb 2017at [4], and the high number of fatal cases seen among A/H7N9 positive cases require active surveillance and investigation in to the viral spread and whether some changes in genome may be enhancing its transmission potential  to infect humans-Mod.UBA]
