Bolivia En Tus Manos.com [machine trans. edited]<http://www.boliviaentusmanos.com/noticias/salud/249613/brasil-prohibe-la-nuez-de-la-india-tras-asociar-su-consumo-con-tres-muertes.html>Brazil banned the sale and import of Indian walnut after health authorities associated the consumption of this seed used to lose weight, with the deaths of 3 people in the country, officials said today [8 Feb 2017].The veto also extends to the so-called ""Napoleon's Hat,"" which, like Indian walnut, was unevenly distributed as a weight-loss treatment by mimicking the effects of laxatives, a statement from the National Agency of Sanitary Surveillance (ANVISA) said. The entity argued that its decision was based on the ""evidence of toxicity"" found in the bodies of 3 people who died in Brazil consuming the nut from India.Seed use is associated with 2 deaths recorded in the states of Mato Grosso do Sul (midwest) and Maranḥo (northeast) and a 3rd in Sao Paulo (southeast), although the latter is under investigation.With the measure, these 2 products ""cannot be used in the composition of food, medicines or any other consumer product"" in Brazil, the information added.ANVISA announced in an alert ""that there was never a registration"" of the products made with the 2 mentioned items.--Communicated by:Kathryn Soderholm<kathryn.soderholm@gmail.com>[The Indian walnut has a number of different names depending upon which document you look at, or the year a document was published. Among the names found are: _Aleurites triloba_ Forst, and _Croton moluccanus_ L., yet the most commonly found and apparently accepted name at present is _Aleurites moluccanus_ (L.). Common names include Candlenut oil tree, Candleberry, Varnish tree, Indian or Belgaum walnut, and Indian walnut. They all are members of the Euphorbiaceae family.The tree has been imported into the United States and can be found in Florida, where the subtropical climate seems to suit it well. It has also been imported into the Virgin Islands and Hawaii where the more tropical weather suits it well also. It is a large nut, like the macadamia nut; however, it is reported to be more bitter tasting than the macadamia nut as well as slightly larger. It has also been described as being approximately twice the size of an almond, although it is round, not oblong.Many members of the Euphorbiaceae family contain saponins which can be very irritating to the mucus membranes, but more especially to the gastro-intestinal tract.Multiple web sites, many associated with ""Indianwalnut.co"" tout the weight loss properties of this nut as well as noting that an excess of the product can be toxic. It quickly follows up with the statement, ""as most things can be."" The general rule of anything toxic is that ""dose makes the poison."" The multiple websites associated with <Indianwalnut.co> point out that it must be taken according to label directions to be effective but not toxic. However, there are no blind trials or safety or efficacy studies to support this, other than apparent word of mouth or internet claims.This article does not tell us how much of the touted miracle weight loss product the deceased individuals consumed, nor whether there were pre-existing conditions. However, given that animals have experienced toxic effects from saponins, it may be likely that human beings would also be susceptible. We will look forward to finding out whether this nut or its dietary derivative (pill/capsule, solution) was the source of the deaths. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>.].................................................tg//msp/mpp"
