WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/20-february-2017-seoulvirus-usa-and-canada/en/>On 24 Jan 2017, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), through their Health Alert Network (HAN) publication, reported 8 cases of infection with Seoul virus in the states of Wisconsin (n=2) and Illinois (n=6). The 1st 2 cases were reported in early December 2016, when 2 home-based pet rat breeders in Wisconsin State developed an acute febrile illness, later confirmed as Seoul virus infection. Rats (_Rattus norvegicus_) at some facilities also tested positive for Seoul virus. Human infection with Seoul virus is not commonly found in the United States; this virus family also includes Sin Nombre virus, which is the most common hantavirus causing disease in the United States. This is the 1st known outbreak associated with pet rats in the United States.To date, a total of 11 people have been infected in the states of Wisconsin, Illinois, and Colorado. 2 of the individuals were hospitalized. Seoul virus infection was also confirmed in pet rats from ratteries in Wisconsin, Illinois, and Minnesota. Follow-up investigations indicate that potentially infected rats may have been distributed or received in Alabama, Arkansas, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, North Dakota, South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, and Wisconsin. All investigations to date have indicated that the affected breeding facilities are limited to the pet rat trade. None of these ratteries supply (or have supplied) rats to research facilities.In addition, follow-up investigations by the United States CDC and public health officials in Canada indicate that rats have been exchanged between the United States and Canada. According to the Canada IHR national focal point report of 10 Feb 2017, the Canadian rat breeding facilities under investigation exported rats to the United States and also imported rats from affected United States facilities. As of 10 Feb 2017, 3 positive human cases for the hemorrhagic fever renal syndrome (HFRS) group of hantaviruses, which includes Seoul, Hantaan, Puumala, and Dobrava viruses, have been identified by serology in Canada. No serious illness was reported in these individuals. 2 of the cases breed rats, and the 3rd had contact with rats. Further laboratory testing and virus characterization is ongoing. Further epidemiologic investigation and testing of rats is planned.Public health response----------------------Health authorities both in the United States and Canada are implementing the following measures to respond to the outbreak:Canada:- further laboratory testing and virus characterization to confirm Seoul virus exposure in humans;- assessment of associated pet rat breeding facilities;- further epidemiological investigation and testing of rats.United States of America:- the United States CDC and State Health Departments are collaborating to investigate the outbreak;- depopulation carried out in some affected ratteries;- investigations regarding the importation and exportation of the rats before the detection of the outbreak ongoing.Information on Seoul virus--------------------------Seoul virus is a type of hantavirus that is transmitted from rats to humans after exposure to aerosolized urine, droppings, or saliva of infected rodents, or after exposure to dust from their nests or bedding. Transmission may also occur from rat bites or when contaminated materials are directly introduced into broken skin or onto mucous membranes. For Seoul virus, the natural hosts are the Norway rat (_Rattus norvegicus_) and the black rat (_Rattus rattus_). This virus has been found in both pet rats and wild rat populations around the world. The incubation period varies from 1 to 8 weeks; however, most individuals develop symptoms within 1-2 weeks after exposure. Seoul virus infection symptoms can range from mild to severe. In the severe form of the disease, patients can exhibit bleeding and renal syndromes. Inapparent infections can also occur. Seoul virus infection is not transmissible from human to human. There is no effective treatment available for Seoul virus infection.WHO risk assessment-------------------Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) is the severe form of the infection with Seoul virus. The case fatality rate (CFR) among humans who develop HFRS due to Seoul virus ranges from 1-2 percent. Of the 11 cases reported in the United States so far, 2 were hospitalized and none have died.Although the 3 HFRS cases in Canada are still under investigation, there is some evidence of an epidemiological link to the United States Seoul virus outbreak.There is no information available on further distribution of the infected rats outside of the United States and Canada. Rats do not show symptoms of disease when they are infected with Seoul virus. Once infected, rats can continue to shed virus throughout their lives, potentially infecting other rats and humans. The United States CDC is working with state health departments in the United States and others to investigate the outbreak of Seoul virus infections in pet rats and humans, to trace shipments and transport of rats, some of which may be infected with Seoul virus, to better understand how the virus entered the pet trade and to interrupt transmission of Seoul virus to other rats and humans.Because there is presently no effective treatment for Seoul virus infection, preventing infections in people is important.If infected rodents have contact with local rat populations, the infection with Seoul virus could spread to non-infected rodents and consequently change the prevalence of this zoonotic disease, both in rodents and in humans.WHO advice----------International pet trade has the potential to spread and cause emerging or re-emerging disease in humans. WHO encourages State Parties to developed and maintain the capacity to detect, and report similar events.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp[Utah has been added recently to the states with a Seoul virus positive human cases. Illness from Seoul virus infection was detected in a Utah County resident who had direct contact with a now defunct rat-breeding facility, according to state and Utah County health officials (see ProMED-mail posting Hantavirus update - Americas (15): USA (UT) 20170215.4841686).ProMED has not posted cases of human infections with the HFRS group of hantaviruses in Canada previously. The specific locations of the cases in Canada, mentioned above, are not given.Jan Clement provided a good overview of Seoul virus around the world (see ProMED-mail archive no 20141028.2907225). Most reports are of Seoul virus in wild rats. However, the virus has also been isolated from laboratory and pet rats, as in the recent cases in the USA this year (2017).A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Canada and the states in the USA where these recent cases have occurred, can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>. - Mod.TY]
