Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/iowa-reports-three-fold-rise-hepatitis-c-cases-since-2000/>‰Û The Iowa Department of Public Health (IDPH) has released its 1st report on hepatitis C infection in Iowa. Hepatitis C is the leading cause of liver cancer and liver transplants in the USA. A comparison of data from 2000 to 2015 shows the number of Iowans diagnosed with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection increased nearly 3-fold, from 754 cases in 2000 to 2235 cases in 2015. The number of HCV diagnoses among those between the ages of 18 and 30 has more than quadrupled since 2009, with 303 diagnoses in 2015. According to the (CDC) [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention], most people with HCV infection don't have any symptoms and therefore are not tested or diagnosed. Because of this, the number of Americans and Iowans who are infected with hepatitis C is likely much higher than the report indicates.According to Randy Mayer, Chief of the IDPH Bureau of HIV, STD, and Hepatitis, the increase in diagnoses is expected and is a positive sign. ""These data indicate that Iowans are getting tested and referred to treatment by their medical providers. Everyone born between 1945 and 1965 and anyone who has ever injected non-prescription drugs, even once, should be tested for hepatitis C.""The majority (63 percent) of Iowans reported with HCV were between the ages of 45 and 64. This mirrors national data, and has prompted the CDC to recommend anyone born between 1945 and 1965 talk to their doctor about being tested for Hepatitis C. CDC also recommends testing for HCV if: - You ever injected non-prescription drugs, even if you injected only one time or many years ago. - You were treated for a blood clotting problem before 1987. - You received a blood transfusion or organ transplant before July 1992. - You are on long-term hemodialysis treatment. - You have abnormal liver tests or liver disease. - You work in health care or public safety and were exposed to blood through a needle stick or other sharp object injury. - You are infected with HIV.Over 55 percent of Iowans between the ages 18 and 64 who have HCV live in one of 6 counties: Polk, Linn, Scott, Woodbury, Pottawattamie, and Black Hawk.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is likely to be an oversimplification to attribute the tripling of newly reported cases of hepatitis C solely to increased screening as the state of Iowa is likely to be afflicted by the same epidemic of injection drug use found in much of the USA. Clearly much of the increase in newly diagnosed cases is also related to newer infection spread by illicit injection drug use, primarily heroin. To attack that problem squarely it is vital to treat drug addiction as a medical and not a legal problem and provide programs for education and for rehabilitation as well as for needle exchange program so that users do not have to share contaminated needles. There is no information to suggest that needle exchange programs increase injection drug use. Although hepatitis C infection can now be effectively treated with oral medications, the course is quite expensive and prevention is less costly than treatment. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/218>.]
