WHO Emergencies preparedness, response [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/23-february-2017-meningococcal-disease-togo/en/>Meningococcal Disease - Togo:-----------------------------Since [Sun 1 Jan 2017], 201 suspected cases of meningitis with 17 deaths were reported by 19 health districts. In week 2, the district of Akebou, which is part of the Plateau Region, issued an alert after 4 cases of meningitis were reported. In week 4, the epidemic threshold was reached with 9 cases and an attack rate of 12.4 per 100 000 inhabitants. From 2 January to 12 February 2017, 48 suspected meningitis cases with 3 deaths were reported (case fatality rate of 6.3 percent). Of these, 14 specimens were confirmed as _Neisseria meningitidis_ serogroup W by PCR.The Plateau Region, together with the other 3 regions in the country benefited from the mass vaccination campaign with MenAfriVac in December 2014. [MenAfriVac is a protein conjugate vaccine developed for use in sub-Saharan Africa for children and adults between 9 months and 29 years of age against _Neisseria meningitidis_ group A (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MenAfriVac>).]Togo is part of the African meningitis belt and documents cases and deaths due to meningitis every year. In 2016, the country recorded an epidemic in the northern part caused by _Neisseria meningitidis_ serogroup W. A total of 1975 cases and 127 deaths were reported in 2016.In response to the outbreak, the following measures are being implemented: - 56 000 doses of meningitis vaccines have been requested from the International Coordinating Group (ICG) for the planned vaccination campaign. - WHO Field Mission was deployed in the field to strengthen outbreak management. - Strengthening of meningitis surveillance at the district level. - Training of clinicians at the district level on case management. - Conducting cross-border meetings with Ghana and Benin.WHO risk assessment------------------The largest burden of meningococcal disease occurs in the African meningitis belt. Although the successful roll-out of MenA conjugate vaccine has resulted in the decreasing trend of meningitis A, other meningococcal serogroups are shown to have caused epidemics. This report of the _Neisseria meningitidis_ W outbreak in Togo calls for a close monitoring of the changing epidemiology of meningococcal disease. There is a need to ensure that global stocks of vaccines are available, laboratory and epidemiologic surveillance systems are strengthened and outbreak response strategies in the countries are on hand.The epidemic response consists of prompt, appropriate case management involving reactive mass vaccination of populations, and strengthening of meningitis surveillance.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp[Although there are at least 13 _ Neisseria meningitidis_ serogroups, based on the antigenic specificity of their capsular polysaccharides, disease due to serogroups A, B, C, Y, and W are most common. There are vaccines that contain capsular polysaccharide (A, C, Y, W), either alone or conjugated to protein. Conjugate vaccines are preferable, because, unlike the polysaccharide vaccines, conjugate vaccines immunize infants, reduce the carriage of meningococci in the throat and thus its transmission, as well as confer a more sustained immune response, and, therefore, longer-term protection than the polysaccharide vaccines. Serogroup B vaccines are based upon meningococcal B outer membrane vesicle protein antigens, because group B polysaccharide is poorly immunogenic in humans and is a potential auto-antigen.Immunity following use of a meningococcal vaccine is specific for the type of capsular polysaccharide the vaccine contains in regard to the A, C, Y, and W polysaccharide vaccines or the surface proteins in regard to serogroup B vaccine, with no cross-protection against infection due to other meningococcal groups.Following the mass introduction into the population of a vaccine specific for one particular meningococcal serogroup, the incidence of disease due to that serogroup has been found to fall dramatically, e.g., serogroup C disease in the UK following the introduction of C vaccine and serogroup A in the African Meningitis Belt following A vaccine, only to be replaced by emergence of disease due to other meningococcal serogroups.In view of replacement of meningococcal serogroup A with other serogroups, in the current case serogroup W, following mass vaccination of the population with serogroup A conjugate vaccine in Togo, reactive mass vaccination to control this outbreak would require use of a meningococcal vaccine containing serogroup W, e.g., the conjugate ACWY vaccine. However, the news article above fails to say what vaccine is being used.ProMED-mail would appreciate more information in this regard from knowledgeable sources.Togo is a country in West Africa on the Gulf of Guinea, between Ghana to the west, Benin to the east. The country is divided into 5 regions; from north to south, the regions are Savanes, Kara, Centrale, Plateaux and Maritime (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Togo>). - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/64>.]
