BBC [edited]<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-39073389>Kim Jong-nam, the half-brother of North Korea's leader, was killed by a highly toxic nerve agent, says Malaysia.Mr Kim died last week [week of 12 Feb 2017] after 2 women accosted him briefly in a check-in hall at a Kuala Lumpur airport.Malaysian toxicology reports indicate he was attacked using VX nerve agent, which is classified as a weapon of mass destruction by the United Nations.There is widespread suspicion that North Korea was responsible for the attack, which it fiercely denies.It responded furiously to Malaysia's insistence on conducting a post-mortem examination and has accused Malaysia of having ""sinister"" purposes.What does the toxicology report say?Malaysia's police chief Khalid Abu Bakar said on [Fri 17 Feb 2017] that the presence of the nerve agent had been detected in swabs taken from Mr Kim's eyes and face.One of the women Mr Kim interacted with at the airport on [Mon 13 February 2017] had also fallen ill with vomiting afterwards, he added.Mr Khalid said other exhibits were still under analysis and that police were investigating how the banned substance might have entered Malaysia.""If the amount of the chemical brought in was small, it would be difficult for us to detect,"" he said.What is the deadly VX nerve agent? - The most potent of the known chemical warfare agents, it is a clear, amber-colored, oily liquid which is tasteless and odorless. - Works by penetrating the skin and disrupting the transmission of nerve impulses - a drop on the skin can kill in minutes. Lower doses can cause eye pain, blurred vision, drowsiness and vomiting - It can be disseminated in a spray or vapor when used as a chemical weapon, or used to contaminate water, food, and agricultural products - VX can be absorbed into the body by inhalation, ingestion, skin contact, or eye contact - Clothing can carry VX for about 30 minutes after contact with the vapor, which can expose other people - Banned by the 1993 Chemical Weapons ConventionWho could be behind the attack? How could it have killed Mr Kim?Bruce Bennett, a weapons expert at the research institute the Rand Corporation, told the BBC it would have taken only a tiny amount of the substance to kill Mr Kim.He suggests a small quantity of VX - just a drop - was likely put on cloths used by the attackers to touch his face. A separate spray may have been used as a diversion.Mr Khalid has previously said the fact the woman who accosted Mr Kim immediately went to wash her hands showed she was ""very aware"" that she had been handling a toxin.It would have begun affecting his nervous system immediately, causing first shaking and then death within minutes.Is Kuala Lumpur airport safe?The authorities say they intend to decontaminate the airport and areas the suspects are known to have visited.VX is a v-type nerve agent, which means the substance can remain lethal for a long period of time.""It's as persistent as motor oil. It's going to stay there for a long time... which means anyone coming in contact with this could be intoxicated from it,"" forensic toxicologist John Trestrail told the Associated Press news agency.No passengers, airport workers or medical staff who treated Mr Kim were reported to have become ill in the aftermath of the incident, the news agency adds.Tens of thousands of passengers are believed to have passed through the airport since the attack more than 10 days ago.Who was Kim Jong-nam?North Korea has not identified the man who died as Kim Jong-nam, only as a North Korean citizen. [Yes but they certainly wanted the body back straight away. Would they do that for an ordinary citizen? - Mod.TG]The well-travelled and multilingual oldest son of late North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, he was once considered a potential future leader. He has lived abroad for years and was bypassed in favour of his half-brother, Kim Jong-un.He had been travelling on a passport under the name Kim Chol. North Korea has yet to confirm that the deceased was actually Kim Jong-nam.How did he die?A woman was seen in CCTV footage approaching Mr Kim and wiping something across his face. He sought medical help at the airport, saying someone had splashed or sprayed him with liquid.He had a seizure and died on the way to hospital. His body remains in the hospital's mortuary, amid a diplomatic dispute over who should claim it.Main players in mysterious killing. Who did it?Malaysia says it was clearly an attack by North Korean agents. Four people are in custody, including one North Korean and the 2 women he interacted with at the airport. Seven North Koreans are being sought, including a diplomat.There are a number of North Korean organizations capable of directing such an attack, including the exclusive Guard Command.The North hit back at Malaysia on [Thu 23 Feb 2017], saying it was responsible for the death of 1 of its citizens.In response, Malaysian Foreign Minister Anifah Aman warned North Korean envoy Kang Chol on [Fri 24 Feb 2017] that he would be expelled unless he stopped ""spewing lies"" about the attack.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The amount of VX on this man's skin was likely minute. So the diagnostics on this must be very sensitive.VX is the American name of chemical warfare agent that is a very persistent substance. It is capable or remaining on material, on the terrain or other equipment for prolong periods of time. This product is also capable of off-gassing to some extent from clothing and other substances. Consequently, inhalation exposure may continue. However, at pH levels between 7 and 10 large quantities of VX are transformed into an extremely non-volatile product of hydrolysis which is incapable of penetrating skin. Generally the skin is slightly more acidic than the neutral pH of 7.VX is a binary chemical warfare agent. Binary, meaning it generally comes as 2 chemicals that are kept apart until the time of use. This makes it a case of essentially storing 2 relatively harmless chemicals. Therefore, in weapon (bomb, grenade, projectile etc) the chemicals were separated by a divider of sorts within the weapon shell and that divider was dissolved, lowered or otherwise removed so the 2 chemicals would mix at the time of just before impact. The chemical name of VX is O-ethyl S-diisopropylaminomethyl methylphosphonothiolate. The sulfur component is the 2nd component.VX is classified as a persistent chemical agent because of its thick oily character. This persistent oily character allowed for the diagnostics to find it on the skin of the victim. Closed circuit television monitoring captured these women wiping something on his face. Hence, the authorities knew to focus on his face for trace evidence of a substance. Generally VX works faster by inhalation than by absorption. Use of the substance on his face may have promoted some inhalation as well as absorption through the skin.VX is classified as a nerve agent, primarily because of its ability to bind to acetylcholinesterase esterase or to block the effects of acetylchoninesterase. Therefore the normal activity of this enzyme does not occur, and there is over stimulation of the cholinergic nervous system.When the poisoning is very rapid the normally associated clinical signs of nausea, vomiting, constricted pupils, difficulty breathing, coughing and runny eyes may not occur, as convulsions and unconsciousness and death occur very rapidly.It appears this victim succumbed quite quickly, and thus there may have been some inhalation as well as absorption of the substances. While there are antidotes they must be administered quite quickly to have a beneficial effect. As any agent or guard at the airport was not thinking of a chemical weapon attack they may not have recognized the acute symptoms, thinking more likely of a heart attack. Likewise, it is unlikely they would have had the antidote on hand. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/147>.]
