BBC [edited]<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-australia-39075961>A 10-year-old Australian boy has survived being bitten by one of the world's most venomous spiders after being treated with 12 vials of anti-venom, reports say.It is thought to be one of the largest doses of anti-venom ever administered in Australia.[MM] was bitten on his finger by a funnel-web spider while helping his father clear out a shed. He suffered multiple seizures, dilated eyes and began frothing at the mouth.""It sort of clawed onto me and all the legs and everything crawled around my finger and I couldn't get it off,"" he told Friday's Australian Daily Telegraph.[M's] family used his shirt as a tourniquet to curtail the spread of the venom as he was rushed to hospital.The boy received anti-venom at the hospital, believed to be the highest dose given to a bite victim in living memory, the Telegraph said.The spider has been captured and taken to the Australian Reptile Park near Sydney, where it is now being used in a venom-milking programme.The park's general manager Tim Faulkner said [M] was ""as lucky as they get"".February and March are the peak breeding season for many funnel-web species.The small and deadly funnel-web spider: - Named after their irregularly-shaped webs, funnel-web spiders live in moist habitats - such as under logs or shrubbery - or rotting parts of trees - There are 40 species, not all of which are dangerous - The Sydney Funnel-web Spider, is probably responsible for most recorded deaths and the most serious bites - They sometimes fall into swimming pools, where they can live up to 30 hours under water. [An impressive feat for a spider. - Mod.TG] - Their venom can lead to heart collapse, affect the nervous system and intestines, and cause difficulty in breathing. - There have been 13 recorded deaths from funnel-web spider bites in Australia - nobody has died since an anti-venom programme began.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The Australian funnel-web spiders are Atricinae, a subfamily of spiders in the funnel-web family of Hexathelidae. All members of this particular subfamily are native to Australia. While these are the most dangerous and deadly, all funnel-web spiders should be considered dangerous. Especially since recognizing spiders is not everyone's specialty.The funnel-web spiders are some of the most deadly spiders in the world.Generally these are shiny black or brown spiders with the males most often being of slight build, compared to the females. The head and carapace are generally lightly haired.Most species live in wet forest regions of the east coast and highlands of Australia, from Tasmania to north QueenslandIn Sydney suburbia, funnel-web spiders mostly live in the moist upland forest areas of the Hornsby Plateau to the north and the Woronora Plateau to the south, where sheltered burrow habitats abound in both bushland and gardens. The dry, flatter areas of western Sydney and the Cumberland Plain have fewer funnel-webs, their numbers picking up again in the foothills of the Blue Mountains. Two funnel-web species are common in the Sydney region - the Sydney Funnel-web Spider (_Atrax robustus_) and the Southern Tree-dwelling Funnel-web Spider (_Hadronyche cerberea_).Funnel-webs burrow in moist, cool, sheltered habitats - under rocks, in and under rotting logs, crevices, and rot and borer holes in rough-barked trees. In gardens, they prefer rockeries and dense shrubberies, and are rarely found in more open situations like lawns. The most characteristic sign of a Funnel-web's burrow is the irregular silk trip-lines that radiate out from the burrow entrance of most species. These trip-lines alert the spider to possible prey, mates or danger.Rain may flood burrows and the temporary retreats of male Funnel-webs, causing an increase in their activity. Funnel-webs are very vulnerable to drying out, so high humidity is more favorable to activity outside the burrow than dry conditions. Most activity is nocturnal. Gardeners and people digging in soil may encounter Funnel-webs in burrows at any time of the year.Only male spiders have been responsible for all recorded funnel-web envenomation deaths - why is it so? The answer lies in a combination of spider behavior, venom chemistry, and even colonial politics.During the warmer months of the year (November-April) male funnel-webs wander about at night looking for females in their burrows. Males wandering in suburban gardens may sometimes become trapped inside houses or garages, especially those with concrete slab foundations where entry points under doors are easily reached.The venom of the male Sydney Funnel-web Spider is very toxic. This is because male spider venom contains a unique component called Robustoxin (d-Atracotoxin-Ar1) that severely and similarly affects the nervous systems of humans and monkeys, but not of other mammals. The absence of this chemical from female Sydney Funnel-web Spider venom explains why bites by these females have not caused any deaths. However, not all funnel-web species show such a large gender-based difference in venom toxicity.An antivenom for the Sydney Funnel-web Spider was 1st developed for clinical use in 1981 by Dr Struan Sutherland and his team at the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories. No deaths have occurred since its introduction. At the same time Sutherland experimentally established the effectiveness of the compression/immobilization 1st aid technique for funnel-web bite. Much of the venom for this research was supplied through a funnel-web venom milking program at the Australian Reptile Park. This antivenom has also been effective against other dangerous funnel-web spider species. As well, it has been successfully used in cases of mouse spider envenomation. Antivenom is held at major city and regional hospitals.Despite the availability of an effective antivenom, correct and immediate 1st aid is still an essential requirement for funnel-web spider (and mouse spider) envenomation. The recommended 1st aid technique is pressure/immobilization (as for snake bite) and this must be done as quickly as possible. The pressure/immobilization technique compresses surface tissues and reduces muscle movement, greatly slowing the lymphatic flow.Spider bites usually take place on a limb. A pressure bandage should be applied as soon as possible after a bite has occurred. This should be applied as tightly as for a sprained ankle, starting from the bitten area and binding the entire limb above the bite. A rigid splint should be bound onto the limb to prevent limb movement. The patient should be kept as quiet as possible and medical attention sought. If possible, keep the spider for positive identification.This young man was most fortunate to have obtained rapid medical treatment and that there was readily available antivenom.Positions of this comment have been extracted from: <https://australianmuseum.net.au/funnel-web-spiders-group>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/186>.]
