Syria Direct [in Arabic, trans. & summ. Mod.NS, edited]<http://bit.ly/2meskSj>Doctors serving a collection of unorganized camps near the Syrian and Turkish border in northern, rebel-held Syria are receiving hundreds of patients with bronchiolitis each day. Most of these patients are children under the age of 2 years.The outbreak of bronchiolitis, a contagious inflammation of the terminal ends of the bronchial tubes in the lungs usually caused by a viral infection, started in early February 2017. The disease is spreading among infants and toddlers in Atma camp [north of Idlib] because residents are crammed into tight quarters and are using firewood to heat their closed tents, according to Dr Muhannad Khalil, an internal medicine specialist at Atma Charity Hospital. The 60 000 Atma camp residents live in damaged tents, rely on aid deliveries and survive without developed water and sewage infrastructure.Dr Khalil said that ""we used to see around 20 or 25 patients each day, but over the past month [February 2017] we have seen a large increase in the number of patients with bronchiolitis. We currently receive 90 to 100 patients a day. All of the patients have come directly from Atma camp; we have not documented any cases of bronchiolitis from outside the camp, "" Dr Khalil added.Dr Khalil emphasized that ""the number of patients with bronchiolitis considerably increased because of the crowding inside the camps as people are living in small and cramped quarters."" He added that ""bronchiolitis, which spreads through contact with respiratory fluids or saliva, is easily contracted since people are in close contact with each other."" He stressed that ""the way people are heating their homes, using firewood, for example, is contributing to an increase in cases.""Dr Khalil pointed out that ""the vast majority of patients with bronchiolitis are nursing infants aged 2 or younger. This is because the diameter of their bronchi is small, so the membranes lining them are more prone to mucus clogs.""Dr Khalil indicated that ""there are no hospitals inside Atma camp, just medical points that carry medicines such as painkillers and antibiotics. So patients must rent a car and drive 12 km [approx. 7.5 mi] to one of the hospitals inside Atma town.""""At Atma Charity Hospital, where I work, we have a scarcity of intravenous fluid and nebulizers,"" he added, stressing that ""to compensate for the lack of supplies, we give patients smaller intravenous doses and shorten the amount of time a patient spends on a nebulizer by half."" He added that ""another hospital in the city has also opened a clinic specifically to treat patients with bronchiolitis.""Dr Khalil explained that ""without treatment, the bronchial tubes of the patient could swell and block his airway, which could lead to death, "" indicating that ""several patients, especially those in critical condition, were transferred to the intensive care clinics in Turkey because we lack intensive care rooms and medical supplies to treat them.""A man, who lives in a tent in Atma camp with his family, said that ""5 days ago, my son developed a cough and started to have breathing difficulty. I took him to the hospital and to take treat through a nebulizer, and he became stable,"" he added, stressing that ""I am worried he may infect his siblings as they started to develop a cough."" He added that ""I am confident that my son got sick from living inside our crowded tent. I live with my wife and 4 children in a small tent, and we use firewood for heating.""[Byline: Shefaa Yasin, Mohammed Al-Falouji]--Communicated by:ProMED-MENA<promed-mena@promedmail.org>[Bronchiolitis is an acute inflammation of the bronchioles, which is usually caused by a viral infection, most commonly respiratory syncytial virus. It may occur in people of any age, but severe symptoms are usually evident only in young infants. Clinical manifestations include low-grade fever, coryza, and congestion and apnea, while severe cases might result in respiratory distress.The diagnosis of bronchiolitis is based on clinical presentation. Treatment of the disease is directed toward symptomatic relief and maintenance of hydration and oxygenation.Prevention of bronchiolitis is not easy because the viruses causing the disease are common. Measures to reduce the transmission of the viruses include hygienic measures such as frequent washing of hands, in addition to keeping the infected children home from childcare or school until improvement, and keeping children away from infected people. - Mod.NSMost cases of bronchiolitis are caused by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). RSV infection (<https://www.cdc.gov/rsv/clinical/index.html>) can cause a variety of respiratory illnesses. And these illnesses sometimes cause fever. RSV infection most commonly causes a cold-like illness. But it can also cause bronchitis, croup, and lower respiratory infections like bronchiolitis and pneumonia. Of every 100 infants and young children with RSV infection, 25 to 40 (25 percent to 40 percent) will show signs of pneumonia or bronchiolitis. Premature infants, very young infants, and those with chronic (always present) lung or heart disease or with suppressed (weakened) immune systems have a greater chance of having a more severe infection such as a lower respiratory tract infection. Infection without symptoms is rare among infants.Infants with a lower respiratory tract infection typically have a runny nose and a decrease in appetite before any other symptoms appear. Cough usually develops 1 to 3 days later. Soon after the cough develops, sneezing, fever, and wheezing may occur. In very young infants, irritability, decreased activity, and apnea may be the only symptoms of infection.Most otherwise healthy infants who are infected with RSV do not need hospitalization. Those who are hospitalized may require oxygen, intubation, and/or mechanical ventilation. Most improve with supportive care and are discharged in a few days.Symptomatic RSV infections may occur in adults, particularly in healthcare workers or caretakers of small children. Disease usually lasts less than 5 days, and symptoms are usually consistent with an upper respiratory tract infection and can include a runny nose (rhinorrhea), sore throat (pharyngitis), cough, headache, fatigue, and fever, but some high-risk adults, such as those with certain chronic illnesses or immunosuppression, may have more severe symptoms consistent with a lower respiratory tract infection, such as pneumonia. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/21350>.]
