Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017; 66: 258-260 [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6609a4.htm?s_cid=mm6609a4_w>Arnold S, Melville SK, Morehead B, Vaughan G, Moorman A, Crist MB. Notes from the field. Hepatitis C transmission from inappropriate reuse of saline flush syringes for multiple patients in an acute care general hospital - Texas, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:258-260. DOI:<http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6609a4>.---------------------------------------------------------------------In October 2015, the Texas Department of State Health Services (DSHS) was notified that a hospital telemetry unit nurse had been reusing saline flush prefilled syringes in the intravenous (IV) lines of multiple patients, a risk factor for patient-to-patient transmission of bloodborne pathogens (1). This practice was discovered through an investigation undertaken by the hospital after the nurse was observed to frequently leave a partially filled syringe near a computer work station. State, regional, and local health departments, with consultation from CDC, collaborated with the hospital to investigate infection prevention lapses, assess risk to patients, perform patient notification, and provide bloodborne pathogen testing.Upon interview, the nurse reported reusing syringes during the previous 6 months, erroneously believing that this was a safe, cost-saving measure if no fluids were withdrawn into the syringe before injection of the saline flush (1,2). The nurse had been working in this unit for 18 months, had not worked at another health care facility before or during employment at the hospital, and reported that this practice was not taught by the hospital. The hospital voluntarily notified patients and offered bloodborne pathogen screening to patients who might have been cared for by the nurse during employment from April 2014 to October 2015, when the practice was recognized and corrected (3). Because all telemetry unit patients were required to have IV access, all patients cared for on the unit during shifts worked by the nurse were included in the notification.During October 2015, notification letters were sent to patients via both certified and registered mail to inform them of a possible bloodborne pathogen exposure and a need for laboratory testing for hepatitis B (HBV), hepatitis C (HCV), and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The notification included locations where testing would be offered, a laboratory order form, and a 24-hour hospital hotline number for questions and concerns. The hospital provided testing free of charge through a commercial laboratory that coordinated testing at many satellite locations. Recommended laboratory testing consisted of a baseline screening test and a follow-up test at 6 months after the last potential exposure; exposure was defined as the last time a patient was on the telemetry unit while the nurse was working.Patients who did not have bloodborne pathogen testing or whose letter had been returned as undeliverable, and who had valid contact telephone information were telephoned individually by hospital staff members to provide notification, encourage testing, and request a current mailing address. Notification materials were re-sent to contacted patients; for those who could not be reached, additional address investigation was performed by DSHS using a search of state databases. As of October 2016, among 392 potentially exposed living patients, 262 (67 per cent) had completed initial screening, and 182 (46 per cent) had completed all recommended testing.Among the 262 patients tested at least once for HBV, HCV, and HIV, 4 patients with newly diagnosed bloodborne pathogen infections were identified: 2 with HBV and 2 with HCV. A patient with known pre-existing chronic HCV infection (patient A) had been hospitalized on the telemetry unit on the same day as patient B, 1 of the patients with newly diagnosed HCV. The 2nd patient with newly diagnosed HCV infection did not share overlapping hospital days with any patient with known HCV infection, and the 2 patients with newly diagnosed HBV infection did not share overlapping hospital days with each other or any patient with a known HBV infection. Thus, no further epidemiologic evidence was identified that linked these 3 patients with newly diagnosed infections to a potential source patient.Specimens from patients A and B were sent to the laboratory in CDC's Division of Viral Hepatitis for genotyping and molecular sequencing. Both patients were infected with HCV genotype 4a, which represents approximately 1 per cent of all infections in the USA. Quasispecies (HCV intra-genotype variants) analysis was performed, and <0.38 per cent nucleotide variation among intrahost HCV sequences from these 2 patients was detected (figure [for figure, see original URL. - Mod.LL]). This result indicates transmission linkage between these 2 patients (4). Further epidemiologic investigation indicated that it was unlikely that these 2 patients had any contact outside the facility.Taken together, these findings indicate that at least 1 HCV infection was likely transmitted in the telemetry unit as a result of inappropriate reuse and sharing of saline flush syringes for multiple patients. This investigation illustrates a need for ongoing education and oversight of health care providers regarding safe injection practices. Hospitals and other settings where injections are prepared and administered should perform routine audits (1-3). Syringe reuse, if identified, should be immediately corrected and patient notification should be included as part of the institutional response (1-3).References----------1. Perz JF, Thompson ND, Schaefer MK, Patel PR. US outbreak investigations highlight the need for safe injection practices and basic infection control. Clin Liver Dis. 2010;14:137-51.2. CDC. CDC grand rounds: preventing unsafe injection practices in the US health-care system. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2013;62:423-5.3. Guh AY, Thompson ND, Schaefer MK, Patel PR, Perz JF. Patient notification for bloodborne pathogen testing due to unsafe injection practices in the US health care settings, 2001-2011. Med Care. 2012;50:785-91.4. Campo DS, Xia G-L, Dimitrova Z, et al. Accurate genetic detection of hepatitis C virus transmissions in outbreak settings. J Infect Dis. 2016;213:957-65.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This well documented report illustrates the need for continued scrutiny for violations of infection control procedures in the health care setting. It could have been possible that many more cases of bloodborne viral infections could have occurred. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/245>.]
