Patch.com [edited]<http://patch.com/new-york/williamsburg/first-baby-2017-diagnosed-herpes-after-oral-suction-circumcision>1st baby in 2017 is diagnosed with herpes after oral suction circumcision------------------------------------------------------------The city's health department this week [week of 6 Mar 2017] confirmed the 1st case in 2017 of a baby getting neonatal herpes [simplex, likely type 1 - Mod.LL] following a controversial Jewish circumcision process. Metzitzah b'peh was performed on the baby, which is a ritual where a mohel, or trusted religious circumciser, uses his mouth to suck blood away from the circumcision wound on the infant's penis, the department said. The health department calls metzitzah b'peh ""direct orogenital suction"", or DOS, and said it can transmit herpes to newborn males.Since 2000, there have been 24 confirmed cases of herpes infection following DOS, according to the health department. 2 of the 24 babies died, and at least 2 others suffered brain damage. In 2016, there were 2 confirmed herpes cases following DOS, and in 2015 there were 3, according to the health department. This is the 1st confirmed case of herpes following DOS in 2017. The baby was put on an intravenous antiviral for 14 days.Mayor Bill de Blasio in 2015 took away Michael Bloomberg's mandated consent form that had to be signed by parents before DOS, saying herpes was still reported even after the forms were introduced. Instead, the mayor implemented a plan for the health department to disseminate informational pamphlets and posters in English and Yiddish about a safe bris [circumcision] to obstetricians, gynecologists, pediatricians, and hospitals treating Orthodox Jewish families.The department is emphasizing that health care providers should give expectant religious parents this educational brochure. A health department spokesperson told Patch that she wanted to make it clear this is not an outbreak of herpes.DOS first came from the Mishnah, a highly regarded ancient book of redacted Jewish oral traditions, according to Israeli publication Haaretz. In the Mishnah, the 4th century rabbi Papa of Babylon wrote that a mohel who didn't perform DOS should be fired because he was potentially endangering the infant's health. In the following centuries, medicine advanced, but many ultra-Orthodox Jews still staunchly follow the rabbi's directions in the Mishnah.[byline: Sarah Kaufman]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Most adults have been infected with herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) whether they have had a history of recurrent ulcers on the lips or not and will intermittently have HSV in their saliva even without any obvious lesions. It is during that time that the risk of transmission exists.Davis (Davis DS. Ancient rites and new laws: how should we regulate religious circumcision of minors? J Med Ethics. 2013; 39(7): 456-8) claims that between 2000 and 2011, 11 children died in New York and New Jersey following infection by herpes simplex virus, presumably from infected practitioners. But a review by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] (CDC. Neonatal herpes simplex virus infection following Jewish ritual circumcisions that included direct orogenital suction -- New York City, 2000-2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012; 61(22): 405-9) states that only 2 deaths occurred during the period, with an overall risk of the entity estimated at 1 in 4098 or 3.4 times greater than the risk among male infants considered unlikely to have had direct orogenital suction.A discussion of the issues from Israel (Gesundheit B, Grisaru-Soen G, Greenberg D, et al. Neonatal genital herpes simplex virus type 1 infection after Jewish ritual circumcision: modern medicine and religious tradition. Pediatrics. 2004; 114(2): e259-63 (<http://www.academia.edu/24186235/Neonatal_Genital_Herpes_Simplex_Virus_Type_1_Infection_After_Jewish_Ritual_Circumcision_Modern_Medicine_and_Religious_Tradition>) includes the following extract regarding the history of the subject related to infection prevention:""According to Biblical law, a male infant should be circumcised at the age of 8 days as a sign of the eternal covenant between God and the Jewish people (Genesis 17:10-14; Leviticus 12:3). According to classical rabbinical interpretation, performance of this religious ritual offers medical advantages, a view upheld by many modern medical authorities, as noted earlier. The Babylonian Talmud, the main rabbinical literature completed in the 5th century of the common era, states that for the sake of the infant, the mohel is obliged to perform the metzitzah ""so as not to bring on risk."" The nature of the risk was not specified. It specifically states that ""this procedure is performed for the sake of the infant's safety, and if a mohel does not perform the suction [of the wound], this is deemed dangerous, and he is to be dismissed."" To prevent medical complications, the Talmud permits only an experienced and responsible mohel to perform the ritual circumcision. The Talmud was aware of potential medical problems that could arise from ritual circumcision [13] and, in fact, provided the 1st description of hemophilia in the history of medicine, manifested as a familial bleeding disorder that required circumcision to be postponed [14].""In the 19th century, Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis (1818-1865) established the principles of hygiene and disease transmission [15] after neonatal tuberculosis was documented after circumcision by an infected mohel [16]. Since then, most rabbinical authorities modified their approach in response to these findings. Because the Talmudic injunction to perform metzitzah did not explicitly stipulate oral suction, more than 160 years ago, Rabbi Moses Schreiber (Pressburg, 1762-1839), a leading rabbinical authority, ruled that metzitzah could be conducted by instrumental suction [16], a ruling quickly adopted by most rabbinical authorities [17]. Consequently, the great majority of ritual circumcisions are performed today with a sterile device and not by oral suction by the mohel. However, some orthodox rabbis have felt threatened by criticism of the old religious customs and strongly resist any change in the traditional custom of oral metzitzah. The cultural process of replacing ancient customs by modern wound care has to be encouraged by a heightened awareness of this potentially life-threatening medical complication [16].""On the basis of our observations, the medico-legal impact of neonatal infection by the mohel has to be redefined. Our findings provide evidence that ritual Jewish circumcision with oral metzitzah may cause oral-genital transmission of HSV infection, resulting in clinical disease including involvement of the skin, mucous membranes, and HSV encephalitis. Furthermore, oral suction may not only endanger the child but also may expose the mohel to human immunodeficiency virus or hepatitis B from infected infants. The same consideration that led the Talmudic sages once to establish the custom of the metzitzah for the sake of the infant could now be applied to persuade the mohel to use instrumental suction.""References----------13. Preuss J. Julius Preuss' Biblical and Talmudic Medicine. Rosner F, trans-ed. New York, NY: Ktav Publishers; 1971: 375.14. Rosner F. Hemophilia in the Talmud and rabbinic writings. Ann Intern Med. 1969; 70(4): 833-7; abstract available at <http://annals.org/aim/article/683105/hemophilia-talmud-rabbinic-writings>.15. Semmelweis I, Carter K. The etiology, concept, and prophylaxis of childbed fever. In: Wisconsin Publications in the History of Science and Medicine No. 2. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press; 1983: 263.16. Katz J. Controversy over the Mezizah, the unrestricted execution of the rite of circumcision. In: Law in human hands -- case studies in Halakhic flexibility. Jerusalem, Israel: Magnes Press, Hebrew University; 1998: 357-402.17. Shields Y. The making of Metzitzah. Tradition. 1972; 13: 36-48. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/252>.]
