DG Alerts from CDC (US); State Health Agencies [edited]<http://dgalerts.docguide.com/multistate-usa-mumps-update-1000-cases-reported?nl_ref=newsletter&pk_campaign=newsletter>According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 37 states and the District of Columbia in the U.S. reported mumps infections in 1077 people to CDC from 1 Jan-25 Feb 2017. The distribution of cases is shown in a map [in the URL above].Kansas------Mumps cases have been reported in multiple counties in Kansas. The Kansas Department of Health Environment (KDHE) and affected local health departments are working closely together to identify cases and implement appropriate isolation and exclusion policies to prevent further spread of mumps. Many cases have reported attendance to wrestling tournaments in Kansas, have associations to the University of Kansas or Kansas State University, or reported travel to other states that are also currently experiencing large mumps outbreaks.As of 4 Mar 2017, there have been 56 cases reported. Crawford and Douglas Counties have recorded the most mumps with 13 and 11 cases, respectively. The map below by KDHE indicates counties with mumps cases.Cases range from age 14 to 57 years with a median age of 20 years. Three patients reportedly had complications to mumps and one person required hospitalization for their illness. Of these reported cases, 44 (82%) were vaccinated, 6 (11%) were not vaccinated, 4 (7%) with unknown vaccination history and 2 cases with vaccination history not yet assessed.California---------The Los Angeles County Department of Public Health (LAC DPH) is investigating 2 clusters of mumps cases occurring in adult men in Los Angeles County. As of 9 Mar 2017, there have been 5 confirmed and 2 likely cases of mumps reported in adult men; the majority have been in HIV uninfected men who have sex with men. Contact investigations are ongoing.The health department advises health care providers to consider the diagnosis of mumps among patients presenting with parotitis, other salivary gland swelling, and/or orchitis, even if patients have been vaccinated.Missouri-------The Southeast Missouri State University continues to receive reports of students presenting to their health care provider or the Campus Health Clinic with symptoms of mumps. As of 9 Mar 2017, the University has received 36 confirmed reports of Southeast students infected with mumps (up from 15 cases reported a week ago).A majority of the confirmed cases are generally among students who are members of the university's Greek student community, specifically the fraternity community. Additionally, the campus has suspected cases of mumps from students who are symptomatic, and these students are currently self-quarantined while their test results are evaluated by the State of Missouri. All confirmed cases are shared with the Cape Girardeau County Public Health Center, and the campus has been working with both local and State of Missouri public health agencies in response to the confirmed and suspected cases.Oklahoma---------The Tulsa Health Department (THD) is currently investigating an outbreak of mumps in Tulsa County. There have been 8 cases identified, 5 of which have been laboratory confirmed. One of the confirmed cases is a student at the 7th Grade Center at Owasso Public Schools.THD health officials are following standard disease investigation and response protocols which include working with individuals who have potentially been exposed through close contact with the confirmed and probable cases. THD is working closely with the Owasso Public Schools administration to ensure that students, parents and teachers who may have been exposed are notified and receive guidance on what precautions they may need to take.Persons who may have been exposed should have their immunization status evaluated, watch for signs and symptoms, and seek medical attention as soon as symptoms suggestive of mumps begin. Additionally, THD officials are notifying area clinics and hospitals to provide clinical guidance to health care providers.Texas-----Dallas County Health and Human Services (DCHHS) is reporting 39 mumps cases in Dallas County for 2017. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends reporting all probable and confirmed cases of mumps when an outbreak occurs.DCHHS has identified 30 associated mumps cases between students and teachers in Cedar Hill High School. Not all cases are Dallas County residents. DCHHS has a separate total of 9 additional unrelated mumps cases in the city of Mesquite and Dallas.For medical confidentiality and personal privacy reasons, DCHHS does not provide additional identifying information. DCHHS health officials are urging immunization to protect against and prevent the spread of mumps. People who have had 2 mumps vaccinations (such as 2 MMR vaccines) are usually considered immune from mumps. A 3rd dose of the MMR vaccine is only recommended by the CDC when an individual is associated with an ongoing outbreak.Louisiana--------The Louisiana State University Student Health Center, working with the Louisiana Department of Health, has confirmed several student cases of the mumps. Students with swollen and tender salivary glands under the ears or jaw on one or both sides of the face are advised to seek care at the Student Health Center or with their primary care provider as soon as possible.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[A HealthMap of the US may be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]******[2] USA (Louisiana, Louisiana State University)Date: Fri 10 Mar 2017Source: WAFB [edited]<http://www.wafb.com/story/34727336/several-cases-of-mumps-confirmed-at-lsu>The LSU Student Health Center, along with the Louisiana Department of Health, have confirmed several cases of the mumps among the students.Since mumps is a contagious disease, the university is providing information to protect its students, faculty, and staff.The school says students with swollen and tender salivary glands under the ears or jaw on one or both sides of the face should seek medical care at the Student Health Center or with their primary care physician as soon as possible.Students exhibiting symptoms of mumps should be isolated for at least 5 days from the onset of salivary gland swelling. There is no specific treatment for mumps, however most people who contract the illness fully recover. Mumps can occasionally cause complications, some of them serious. Infected persons are typically contagious from 3 days before until up to 9 days after the onset of symptoms.Mumps is spread by contact with infectious respiratory tract secretions and saliva. To help prevent transmission of the illness, people [who are infected] should follow these tips:- Practice good hand washing.- Do not eat or drink around others.- Cover nose and mouth with a tissue when coughing or sneezing.Receiving 2 doses of the measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine is the best way to prevent mumps. Proof of immunity to mumps or proof of 2 doses of the vaccine is required for all LSU students. However, the vaccine is not 100 percent effective, and the infection can occur even in vaccinated students [But serious complications rarely occur in vaccinated individuals. - Mod.LK].[Byline: Rachael Thomas]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] USA (Pennsylvania; Penn State University)Date: Mon 13 Mar 2017Source: Centre Daily [edited]<http://www.centredaily.com/news/local/education/penn-state/article138349188.html>On Mon [13 Mar 2017], Penn State University released new numbers putting what was just 2 cases [of mumps], 1st reported as of 29 Jan 2017, at 38 probable patients. Of those, 17 have been confirmed by lab testing.The contagious disease's most famous symptom is swelling of glands on the side of the face or neck, but others include things mistaken for the common cold, like headaches and fever. When it gets serious, it can cause swelling in other areas, like the pancreas, brain and spinal cord, according to the Mayo Clinic.The virus can be life-threatening, but other complications can include sterility, miscarriage and hearing loss.""Students who have developed mumps symptoms have been isolated in accordance with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Pennsylvania Department of Health protocols and recommendations, and several of these students have left University Park and returned home during the infectious phase of the illness,"" Penn State said in a release.""University Health Services staff have been in touch with those students who have been in close contact with any confirmed or probable mumps cases. We have excluded students from campus who were identified as a contact of a probable or confirmed case of mumps and could not provide proof of vaccination in an attempt to stop the disease from spreading.""Similar treatment is being recommended to students who show symptoms: stay home, avoid contact with others for about 5 days and don't do anything that would involve coming into contact with someone else's saliva.While the CDC says that mumps is no longer common in the United States, Penn State is not the only place it is popping up in 2017. Since 1 Jan 2017, 1077 cases have been reported in 37 states. In 2016, more than 5000 cases were reported, including a number on university campuses. ""The 2 largest outbreaks were from Iowa and Illinois, each involving several hundred university students,"" said the CDC.The disease has decreased markedly since the 186 000 cases annually in 1967 before vaccinations produced a 99 percent reduction, the Atlanta-based public health institute said.Penn State warned that vaccinations are not 100 percent effective and still require people to take precautions. ""Most of the confirmed mumps cases are in students who received the CDC-recommended 2 doses of MMR vaccine. While 2 doses of MMR vaccine typically provide adequate immunity to the infection, the vaccination does not guarantee protection. According to the CDC, the mumps component of the MMR vaccine is about 88 percent effective when a person receives 2 doses,"" the university said.Students who have not been vaccinated or have immunity from a prior infection are being told to schedule appointments for the 2-dose shots at University Health Services or with their own doctors.""If you cannot show proof of immunity to mumps, you may be excluded from campus for up to 26 days,"" Penn State said.Read more here: <http://www.centredaily.com/news/local/education/penn-state/article138349188.html#storylink=cpy>.[Byline: Lori Falce]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] Australia (Queensland)Date: 14 Mar 2017Source: Whit Sunday Times [edited]<https://www.whitsundaytimes.com.au/news/worst-virus-outbreak-20-years-affecting-young-peop/3154400/>Young adults who have long been protected from the threat of mumps may now be at risk as the protection from the vaccine begins to wear off, contributing to the biggest outbreak of its kind in 20 years.The Courier-Mail is reporting that the measles, mumps, rubella vaccine may not be working properly, leaving many vulnerable to the mumps virus.The largest outbreak of mumps was recorded last year [2016], with 804 cases nationally. Already, there have been 89 diagnosed this year [2017]. Of those, 27% should not have been susceptible because they had been inoculated against the disease through vaccinations given when they turned one, and another while they were under 6.Australian Medical Association Queensland specialist Dr Paul Bartley said it was a ""recognised issue.""""It's difficult to work out what proportion of patients have waning immunity because they tend to only come to medical attention after they get sick,"" he told the Courier-Mail. ""It's been pored over by public health professionals ... but nothing has been confirmed about a problem with the vaccine.""Experts are now considering a 3rd vaccination to help boost the community's protection against mumps. Dr Bartley said the idea was ""under active consideration.""Mumps is a viral illness that causes fever and swollen salivary glands. Serious and potentially lethal complications include inflammation of the brain (encephalitis) or heart muscle (myocarditis). The disease is spread from person to person and is as contagious as the flu (influenza).Mumps is uncommon in developed countries, including Australia, because of the widespread use of the mumps vaccine. Outbreaks still occur, so it is important to continue vaccinating children.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[A HealthMap of Australia may be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/186>.]
