EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited]Information received in response to a Request for Information on the reported poliovirus case in Gilgit-Baltistan from EpiCore Surveillance Project members is included below:a. The child from the Diamir district of Gilgit Baltistan province is 12 months of age. The date of onset of his paralysis was [21 Feb 2017]. A wild poliovirus type 1 [WPV1] was isolated. The WPV1 isolate was 98.78 percent homologous with a virus last isolated in Lahore environmental samples.Responding Member: Dr.M.Hakim FELTP-Pakistanb. The Gilgit Baltistan [GB] province has reported no case of wild polio virus for some years. This new case is a wild polio virus case. It is neither a VDPV [vaccine derived poliovirus] nor an SL [Sabin-like] virus. It is closely linked to virus found in environmental samples from Lahore, the 2nd biggest metropolitan city of Pakistan and found to have exported WPV to [both the] 1st and 2nd polio cases [reported in] 2017. Information on environmental sampling from GB is lacking.c: This is a confirmed case of wild polio virus [WPV] infection as per verification from NIH Islamabad, Pakistan.Responding Member: Prof. Dr. Shamsul Arfin Qasmi Karachi Institute of Medical Sciencesd. In the past week 1 new polio case was reported from Diamir district in Gilgit Baltistan. This brings the total reported polio cases to 2 in 2017 (1st case was reported from Lodharn district in Punjab).e. One case of polio was reported in Gilgit Baltistan (GB) Pakistan. WHO team is on spot visit.Responding Member: Dr Syed Nadeem ur Rehman Technical Officer FELTP Provincial Disease Surveillance & Response Unit Directorate General Health AJK--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED-mail would like to thank our EpiCore Surveillance Project members for their rapid responses to a request for more information on the polio case reported in the media (see prior ProMED posts Poliomyelitis update (02): Pakistan (GB) WPV1 20170314.4901037 and Poliomyelitis (01): Pakistan (GB), global, RFI 20170314.4898724 for additional details). The viral genetic studies demonstrate that both cases reported this year [2017] from Pakistan involved viruses that were genetically related to a WPV1 isolated in environmental samples in Lahore, suggesting significant circulation of this WPV. Of note is that the 1st reported case in 2017 was in Lodhran, Punjab, located approximately 381 km (237 mi) to the southwest of Lahore, whereas the distance from Lahore to Diamir district in Gilgit-Baltistan is approximately 760 km (472 mi) to the northwest.A map showing the provinces of Pakistan can be found at <https://logofmaps.files.wordpress.com/2015/10/pakistan-map.jpg>. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Pakistan can be found at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/140>. - Mod.MPP]******[2] Pakistan - Islamabad, Punjab (Rawalpindi), environmental samplesDate: Thu 16 Mar 2017Source: Dawn [edited]<https://www.dawn.com/news/1320780/environmental-samples-test-positive-for-polio-in-twin-cities>An aggressive polio vaccination campaign will be conducted in the twin cities' high risk areas, after environmental samples tested positive for polio in Islamabad and Rawalpindi this year [2017]. In addition, because both the polio cases from 2017 were reported from low risk areas, 2 nationwide polio vaccination campaigns will be held before the end of May [2017]. Malnutrition will also be raised as an issue, due to the vulnerability of malnourished children to the poliovirus because of their low immunity levels.When an environmental sample tests positive for polio, this means that the poliovirus has been found in a sample of sewerage from area. A sewerage sample is the basic parameter to see if polio vaccination campaigns have been successful. A polio case can be reported from any city because of the frequent movement of people from one city to another, but if the virus is found in sewerage it means the local polio vaccination campaign did not meet its target. A positive environmental sample also shows that the immunity level of children in the area has fallen, making them vulnerable to the disease.Two polio cases have been reported this year [2017] - one from Lodhran in Punjab and another from Diamir in Gilgit-Baltistan. Meanwhile, environmental samples collected from Sabzi Mandi in Islamabad and Dhok Dalal and Safdarabad from Rawalpindi tested positive this year [2017]. The head of the National Emergency Operation Centre (NEOC) Dr Rana Safdar told Dawn that an aggressive polio vaccination campaign will begin in the twin cities' high risk areas on [27 Mar 2017] following the positive samples. In response to a question, Dr Safdar said the virus found in a 14 month old in Diamir was of Lahore origin, and had been found in the city in early 2016.""[The virus] was in low grade and then it shifted to Rawalpindi. The child from Diamir contracted the same virus but, according to our investigation, had never travelled to Rawalpindi. The family travelled to Mansehra [in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, approximately 246 km (153 mi) to the southwest of Diamir and 122 km (76 mi) to the north of Islamabad. - Mod.MPP] in December 2016. The child's father is a truck driver and he frequently moves in different parts of the country, so there is a possibility that he may have become a carrier of the virus,"" he said. ""A large number of people frequently move from Diamir to different areas in the country, so they can also become carriers. [Therefore] it was decided that an aggressive campaign will also be held in Diamir,"" he said.Dr Safdar said that since the poliovirus was also found in Quetta and Karachi this year [2017], and from low risk areas in both cases, 2 nationwide polio vaccination campaigns will be held during the low transmission period. The low transmission period takes place during the winter, from September to May, and during this time the poliovirus is less active and can be eradicated more easily. The oral polio vaccine (OPV) and the inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) will be administered during the nationwide campaigns to ""ensure that the virus does not become active during the high transmission season"", he said.The OPV vaccine contains a live, weak form of the virus that is used to increase the child's immunity level and prevent the child from being a polio carrier. The IPV contains the dead poliovirus, which keeps a child from contracting the virus but not from being a carrier if the virus is already in the body. In response to a question, Dr Safdar said the poliovirus is still trying to survive, which is why cases are reported from low risk areas. ""Another reason is that malnourished children become vulnerable to even the low grade virus due to which we have decided to take up the issue with different government departments, to address the issue of malnutrition so that children's immunity levels stay high,"" he said.[Byline: Ikram Junaidi]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The identification of WPV1 in environmental samples in both Islamabad and Rawalpindi, is further evidence of the continued ""silent"" circulation of the WPV in Pakistan and is obviously of concern since it challenges the goal of interruption of WPV transmission in Pakistan. The occurrence of 2 confirmed cases of WPV associated polio in geographic zones that had been considered ""low risk"" zones is further evidence of the silent circulation of the WPV in Pakistan. The decision to conduct countrywide vaccination campaigns seems highly prudent.The intriguing information in the above report is the mention that father of the most recent case in Gilgit-Baltistan, is a truck driver who travels extensively in the country. One would presume that the father was already immune to the 3 poliovirus types given the endemicity of polio in the country during his childhood, but given his residence in a more removed area in the north of the country, perhaps he did bring the virus back home from one of his trips (or perhaps someone who traveled with him). One wonders if he was studied for possible recent WPV infection as part of the contact tracing activities surrounding his son's illness. The mention that the family traveled to Mansehra in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, only 122 km (76 mi) to the north of Islamabad in the 6-7 weeks preceding onset of illness is also a likely way the child may have had contact with the WPV. - Mod.MPP]******[3] Global update - Polio Eradication InitiativeDate: Wed 15 Mar 2017Source: WHO weekly summary / Polio Eradication Initiative [edited]<http://polioeradication.org/polio-today/polio-now/>[The Polio Eradication Website has not been update as yet. The below information comes from the WHO weekly summary received by email. - Mod.MPP]Poliovirus Weekly Update------------------------New wild poliovirus cases reported this week: 1Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2017: 4Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2016: 37New cVDPV cases reported this week: 0Total number of cVDPV cases in 2017: 0Total number of cVDPV cases in 2016: 5Headlines- Summary of newly-reported viruses this week (see country-specific sections below for further details): Pakistan - 1 WPV1 case, 6 WPV1 positive environmental samples.- Yemen and Syria have both carried out polio immunization campaigns as part of ongoing efforts to protect children affected by conflict.Afghanistan- No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 2, and for 2016 remains 13. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [21 Jan 2017], from Nahr-e-Saraj district, Helmand.- No new environmental positive samples were reported in the past week.- Most areas of Afghanistan are without polio cases, but wild poliovirus continues to circulate in localized geographical areas in the eastern and southeastern regions of the country. Two geographical areas are of particular importance: Bermel district in Paktika province, and Sheegal district in Kunar, which together reported 11 of the 13 polio cases in 2016.- Afghanistan and Pakistan continue to be treated as a single epidemiological block.Pakistan- One new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) case was reported in the past week from Diamir district, Gilgit Baltistan province, with onset of paralysis on [13 Feb 2017]. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 is 2, and for 2016 remains 20.- Historically, only 2 polio cases have been previously reported from Gilgit Baltistan with 1 case in 2011 and the other in 2012, both from the Diamir district.- Six new WPV1 positive environmental samples were reported in the past week, ranging from Punjab to Sindh and from Islamabad to Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. The most recent is from Killa Adbullah district, Balochistan, with a collection date of [15 Feb 2017].- The year 2016 saw the lowest ever annual number of polio cases in the country but poliovirus continues to be isolated through environmental surveillance over a significant geographical range.- Efforts continue in Quetta Block to strengthen programme operations as well as supervision and monitoring mechanisms to stop transmission of WPV1 and VDPV2.Nigeria- No new cases of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2016 remains 4. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [21 Aug 2016] in Monguno Local Government Area (LGA), Borno.- Nigeria continues to implement emergency outbreak response, in response to the detected WPV1 strain and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains affecting the country.- The response is part of a broader regional outbreak response, coordinated with neighbouring countries, in particular the Lake Chad sub-region, including northern Cameroon, parts of Central African Republic, Chad and southern Niger.- Detection of polio cases underscores the risk posed by low-level undetected transmission and the urgent need to strengthen subnational surveillance.Lake Chad Basin- The detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Nigeria poses a risk to the neighbouring countries of the Lake Chad basin and hence an outbreak response plan is being implemented as part of the response to the Nigeria outbreak.- Emergency outbreak response efforts continue across the Lake Chad basin, together with activities to fill subnational surveillance gaps across the region.Guinea and West Africa- No circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) cases have been reported from Guinea in 2016 or 2017. The most recent case was reported from Kankan district with onset of paralysis on [14 Dec 2015]. The total number of cVDPV2 cases for 2015 is 7.- While it has been more than a year since the last case had onset of paralysis in Guinea, undetected circulation cannot be ruled out. A recently-conducted surveillance review in the country found significant improvements to surveillance sensitivity, though some remaining subnational gaps.- Critical to long-term success will be to ensure that capacity and infrastructure is maintained to rapidly detect, and respond to, any potential further virus isolates.Lao People's Democratic Republic- No new cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type one (cVDPV1) were reported in the past week. The most recent case was reported in Fuang district of Vientiane province, with onset of paralysis on [11 Jan 2016]. The total number of cVDPV1 cases remains 3 in 2016 and 8 in 2015.- A recent outbreak response assessment, reviewing epidemiological and surveillance data, found significant improvements, in particular in surveillance, and concluded that it is unlikely that transmission is continuing in the country.- Outbreaks of cVDPVs can arise in areas with low population immunity, emphasizing the importance of maintaining strong vaccination coverage.Officially reported wild poliovirus cases as of 14 Mar 2017Total global cases in 2017: 4 (compared with 7 for the same period in 2016)Total in endemic countries in 2017: 4 (compared with 7 for the same period in 2016)Total in non-endemic countries in 2017: 0 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016)- Afghanistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 1 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: [21 Jan 17]- Pakistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 6 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: [13 Feb 17]- Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: [21 Aug 16]- Total global cases in 2016: 37- Total in endemic countries: 37- Total in non-endemic countries: 0Officially reported cVDPV cases as of 14 Mar 2017Total global cases in 2017: 0 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016)- Lao People's Democratic Republic: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: [11 Jan 16]- Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: [28 Oct-16]- Pakistan: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: [17 Dec 16]- Total global cases in 2016: 5--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Significant in the above report is the isolation of WPV in 6 locations in Pakistan in the past week, consistent with the earlier observation that there is significant ""silent"" transmission of the WPV ongoing in Pakistan - with WPV identified in Punjab, Sindh, the capital area of Islamabad, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan, and up north in Gilgit-Baltistan where a clinical case of paralytic disease was confirmed.Elsewhere there continues to be intense surveillance in the other 2 endemic countries - Afghanistan and Nigeria, and concern on the part of other African countries in the Lake Chad Basin and West Africa about possible transmission of both WPV1 and cVDPV2 coming from Nigeria.An interactive map of the world showing locations of WPV1 and cVDPV cases can be found at: <http://polioeradication.org/polio-today/polio-now/>. - Mod.MPPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/140>.]
