Vice News [edited]<https://news.vice.com/article/inside-taza-the-iraqi-town-gassed-by-isis-with-chemical-rockets>[ProMEDmail regrets the delay in posting, but it just came to our attention. - Mod.DK]An acrid smell still hangs in the air in parts of Taza, and its narrow streets are unusually quiet. On [Tue 8 Mar 2016], Islamic State militants fired more than 40 rockets carrying chemical warheads at this northern Iraqi town of mud-wall compounds and dusty date palms, according to district head Hussein Adil, killing a young child and wounding over 800 civilians. After the attack, which may have been carried out with a mixture of chlorine and mustard gas, nearly half of the town's 30 000 residents, mostly ethnic Turkmen Shiites, fled in terror.Chemical warfare has made an ugly return to Iraq. The Islamic State group has carried out several similar attacks on Kurdish Peshmerga militia, according to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) but the attack was significant for the large number of civilians targeted. It was also notable for occurring shortly before the 28th anniversary of the1988 Halabja chemical attacks - the worst chemical massacre of civilians in history.The rocket that killed F.S. never actually exploded. It landed in the pavement, gouging a small crater 10 m (approx. 30 ft) from where the 3-year-old was playing outside her house. A teacher walking nearby, Hassan Hussein, saw a white gas spewing from the rocket. Hussein said he was the 1st on the scene. ""There was a smell like bad gas or rotten eggs and the girl's skin was coated in an oily film,"" said the 29-year-old teacher from his home in Taza, where he was recovering from the effects of the gas.Hussein picked Fatimah up and rushed her to the nearby hospital. ""I wanted to rescue her,"" he said. But her condition deteriorated, and she died in a hospital bed. Photos show her torso swaddled in bandages and her exposed skin blistered and discolored. Hussein later became sick himself and his throat and eyes burned. His skin blistered from where he had clutched the girl to his chest.These signs and symptoms were consistent with mustard gas poisoning, according to Nanem Saboh Mohamed, a doctor at Taza hospital where many of those affected by the attacks were treated. Hassan Hussein, an Islamic studies primary school teacher, shows burns on his skin he says he suffered after last week's chemical attack. In Iraq, mustard gas is known as ""khardal"" and is nearly synonymous with another chemical attack. ""People know about khardal from Halabja,"" said Mohamed.On [16 Mar 1988], 150 km [approx. 96 mi] to the east of Taza, the town of Halabja near the Iranian border came under a sustained chemical attack from Iraqi aircraft. More than 5000 villagers were killed, in what would become the most infamous episode in dictator Saddam Hussein's genocidal campaign against the Kurds.Those responsible for the chemical attacks against Kurds in the 1980s may today be behind the attacks against Taza and the Peshmerga. ""It's the same guys,"" said Najat Hussein Hassn, a member of the Kirkuk provincial council who hails from Taza. ""Chemical weapons experts in Saddam Hussein's army are now in ISIS."" Hassn's view is supported by a recent announcement that US special forces captured an important figure in ISIS's chemical warfare unit last month February 2016. Iraqi officials said Sleiman Daoud al-Afari was a chemical and biological weapons expert in Saddam Hussein's Military Industrialization Authority, and was detained in a raid on an ISIS-controlled village near Mosul in February 2016.So far, though, experts say the chemical weapons employed by ISIS are not highly lethal. A forensic team that visited Taza after the attacks suggested the gas consisted of sulphur mustard and chlorine; the far deadlier attacks on Halabja used more lethal chemicals including the nerve agent sarin, in addition to mustard gas.The rockets in the current attack were fired from Bashir, a Shiite Turkmen town 6 km (approx. 4 mi) to the west of Taza, which has been under ISIS control since June 2014. Bashir is well within mortar and rocket range of Taza, which Iraqi Security Forces drive through to reach a base in Makhmour. Local Shiite military leaders blame a dearth of political will and a lack of coalition air support for the failure to retake Bashir.""We need the support of leaders in Baghdad and the Kurdistan Regional Government,"" said Zaki Kamal, the head of the Al Qaim Battalion, a Turkmen militia group based in Taza. ""The villages we've retaken so far we did without support,"" he said over the roar of an outgoing shell fired from a militia position outside the town. Since the chemical attack, though, coalition airstrikes have struck ISIS positions near Bashir, suggesting an operation to retake the town could be forthcoming. From the Turkmen militia headquarters in Kirkuk, about 20 km (approx. 12 mi) north of Taza, commander Sayid Mohammed said they would retake the town soon, ""God willing.""The Islamic State's use of chemical weapons is a sign of desperation, according to him. ""It's the end of ISIS, that they will use whatever they have,"" Mohammed said as his earpiece crackled to life and he excused himself to greet a convoy of militia leaders arriving from Baghdad.Meanwhile, Taza locals say they won't feel safe until Bashir is liberated.In a quiet residential street a few hundred meters away from where Fatimah was gassed, another rocket landed in front of a house during the same attack. The explosion blasted out the front windows and blew the leaves off a citrus tree in the courtyard. Plastic warning tape barred the gate on [Tue 8 Mar 2016], and a strong chemical odor lingered in the air.[By Campbell MacDiarmid]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This is a very sad story regarding chemical weapons. The pain and scaring of chemical weapons lasts a long time. The loss of life stings for a lifetime.Mustard gas, or sulfur mustard (Cl-CH2CH2)2S, is a chemical agent that causes severe burning of the skin, eyes, and respiratory tract. It can be absorbed into the body through inhalation, ingestion, or by coming into contact with the skin or eyes.First used during World War I, the gas is effective at incapacitating its victims en masse. Sulfur mustard is generally colorless in its gaseous state, though it may have a faint yellow or green tint. It is most easily recognized by its trademark ""mustardy"" odor, though some compare its smell to that of garlic, horseradish, or sulfur.The gas is a vesicant, or blister-agent, causing redness and itching of the skin resulting in yellow, pus-filled blisters. Because mustard gas strips away the mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, and respiratory tract, victims may also experience irritation of the eyes, temporary blindness, runny nose, cough, shortness of breath, and sinus pain. The digestive tract is also affected, resulting in abdominal pain, diarrhea, fever, and vomiting.Unlike chemical nerve agents such as organophosphates or sarin gas, which immediately incapacitate victims, mustard gas victims typically do not exhibit symptoms of poisoning until 12 to 24 hours after exposure. However, higher concentrations of the gas can cause symptoms to develop within 1-2 hours.Exposure to mustard gas is usually not lethal and most victims recover from their symptoms within several weeks. When it was used during World War I, it killed fewer than 5 per cent of the people who were exposed and got medical care. Some, however, remain permanently disfigured as a result of chemical burns or are rendered permanently blind. Others develop chronic respiratory diseases or infections, which can be fatal. And because mustard gas damages the DNA in human cells, recovered victims are at greater risk for developing certain cancers. Pregnant women exposed to the gas have an increased risk of delivering a baby with birth defects or cancer.If sulfur mustard is released into the air as a vapor, people can be exposed through skin contact, eye contact, or breathing. Sulfur mustard vapor can be carried long distances by wind. If sulfur mustard is released into water, people can be exposed by drinking the contaminated water or getting it on their skin. People can be exposed to liquid sulfur mustard by eating it or getting it on their skin. Sulfur mustard can last from 1-2 days in the environment under average weather conditions and from weeks to months under very cold conditions.Sulfur mustard breaks down slowly in the body, so repeated exposure may have a cumulative effect. Adverse health effects caused by sulfur mustard depend on the quantity, duration, and route of exposure. Sulfur mustard vapor is heavier than air, so it will settle in low-lying areas.Sulfur mustard is a powerful irritant and blistering agent that damages the skin, eyes, and respiratory tract. Sulfur mustard damages DNA, a vital component of cells in the body, especially in the bone marrow. This causes decreased formation of blood cells (aplastic anemia) or decreased red or white blood cells and platelets (pancytopenia).Sulfur mustard can have the following effects on specific parts of the body:- Skin: redness and itching of the skin may occur 2 to 48 hours after exposure and may eventually change to yellow blistering of the skin.- Eyes: irritation, pain, swelling, and tearing may occur within 3 to 12 hours of a mild to moderate exposure. A severe exposure may cause signs and symptoms within 1 to 2 hours and may include the symptoms of a mild or moderate exposure plus light sensitivity, severe pain, or blindness lasting up to 10 days.- Respiratory tract: runny nose, sneezing, hoarseness, bloody nose, sinus pain, shortness of breath, and cough within 12 to 24 hours of a mild exposure and within 2 to 4 hours of a severe exposure.- Digestive tract: abdominal pain, diarrhea, fever, nausea, and vomiting.- Bone marrow: decreased formation of blood cells (aplastic anemia) or decreased red or white blood cells and platelets (pancytopenia) leading to weakness, bleeding, and infections.- Showing these signs and symptoms does not necessarily mean that a person has been exposed to sulfur mustard.How chlorine works:- The extent of poisoning caused by chlorine depends on the amount of chlorine a person is exposed to, how the person was exposed, and the length of time of the exposure.- When chlorine gas comes into contact with moist tissues such as the eyes, throat, and lungs, an acid is produced that can damage these tissues.Immediate signs and symptoms of chlorine exposure- During or immediately after exposure to dangerous concentrations of chlorine, the following signs and symptoms may develop:- Blurred vision- Burning pain, redness, and blisters on the skin if exposed to gas. Skin injuries similar to frostbite can occur if it is exposed to liquid chlorine- Burning sensation in the nose, throat, and eyes- Coughing- Chest tightness- Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. These may appear immediately if high concentrations of chlorine gas are inhaled, or they may be delayed if low concentrations of chlorine gas are inhaled- Fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) that may be delayed for a few hours- Nausea and vomiting- Watery eyes- WheezingWhat the long-term health effects are:- Long-term complications may occur after breathing in high concentrations of chlorine. Complications are more likely to be seen in people who develop severe health problems such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) following the initial exposure.Sarin gas (O-Isopropyl methylphosphonofluoridate), also called GB, is one of the most dangerous and toxic chemicals known. It belongs to a class of chemical weapons known as nerve agents, all of which are organophosphates. The G nerve agents, including tabun, sarin and soman, are all extremely toxic, but not very persistent in the environment. Pure sarin is a colorless and odorless gas, and since it is extremely volatile, and can spread quickly through the air. A lethal dose of sarin is about 0.5 mg; it is approximately 500 times more deadly than cyanide.After exposure to sarin, symptoms begin within minutes. If a person survives for a few hours after exposure, he or she will likely recover from the poisoning. The 1st symptoms of sarin poisoning include a runny nose, blurred vision, sweating, and muscle twitches. Longer exposures result in tightness of the chest, headache, cramps, nausea, vomiting, involuntary defecation and urination, convulsions, coma, and respiratory arrest.Atropine acts an antidote for nerve agents, including sarin. Atropine binds to one type of acetylcholine receptor on the post-synaptic nerve. A 2nd antidote is pralidoxime iodide (2-PAM), which blocks sarin from binding to any free acetyl-cholinesterase. Both should be administered as soon as possible following exposure to the toxin. Diazapam can also be used to prevent seizures and convulsions. Soldiers fighting in regions where chemical weapons are likely to be deployed are now equipped with a Mark I antidote kit containing both atropine and 2-PAM.The term blistering agents in the 1st article is somewhat non-descript. However, sulphur mustard has been used in Syria in the past. It is likely that this is what was used. However, according to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (CW) <https://www.opcw.org/about-chemical-weapons/types-of-chemical-agent/blister-agents/>:""Blister agentsBlister agents, or vesicants, are one of the most common CW agents. These oily substances act via inhalation and contact with skin. They affect the eyes, respiratory tract, and skin, first as an irritant and then as a cell poison. As the name suggests, blister agents cause large and often life-threatening skin blisters which resemble severe burns. Examples include: sulfur mustard (H, HD), nitrogen mustard (HN), lewisite (L) and phosgene oxime (CX). Mustard agents and lewisite are the best known.""Blister agents were 1st tested in combat in 1917 by Germany and have been used in several conflicts since, notably in the Iran-Iraq War (1980-88). They are primarily dispersed in liquid or vapour (aerosol) form and may persist for days. Like phosgene, mustard agents have a delayed effect. Deaths typically only represent a small percentage of the casualties they cause. Exposure to blister agents often results in blindness and permanent damage to the respiratory system.""Portions of this comment have been extracted from: <http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Sarin_Gas.aspx>.<http://emergency.cdc.gov/agent/chlorine/basics/facts.asp><http://www.livescience.com/39248-what-is-mustard-gas.html> and < <https://emergency.cdc.gov/agent/sulfurmustard/basics/facts.asp>. Readers are referred to the chart on <http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Sarin_Gas.aspx> for a more in-depth explanation of what sarin gas can do to the body.- Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/58954>.]
