Web Wire [edited]<http://www.webwire.com/ViewPressRel.asp?aId=208357>Earlier this year [2017], health officials from the Minnesota and Wisconsin Departments of Health announced the results of an investigation at a shipyard in Superior, Wisconsin. The investigation looked into occupational exposures to lead. Of the 233 shipyard workers tested for lead exposure, 171 had elevated levels of lead in their blood, according to media reports.Lead is one of several toxic heavy metals that workers retrofitting old ships may encounter. However, many other occupations could also put workers at risk of lead exposure, since it is still used today and can often be found combined with other metals to produce alloys. Lead and lead alloys are used to make a number of items, including batteries, ammunition and other metal products. In the past, lead was also used regularly in fuel, paint, ceramics, caulk, pipes and solder, just to name a few items.The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) provides the following information about how workers can be exposed to lead:- Workers can be exposed by breathing in lead fumes or lead dust. Lead fumes are produced during metal processing, when metal is being heated or soldered. Lead dust is produced when metal is being cut or when lead paint is sanded or removed. Lead fumes and lead dust do not have an odor, so workers may not know they are being exposed.- Lead dust can settle on food, water, clothes and other objects. If a worker eats, drinks or smokes in areas where lead is being processed or stored, they could ingest it. Not washing one's hands before eating or touching one's mouth are also ways it could be ingested.- Workers can also be exposed by coming into contact with lead dust. Some studies have found lead can be absorbed through skin. Workers that handle lead and then touch their eyes, nose or mouth could be exposed. Lead dust can also get on clothes and hair.""Workers in occupations where they could be exposed to lead are not the only ones at risk,"" said Joe Frasca, Senior Vice President of Marketing at EMSL Analytical, Inc. ""In the case of the shipyard, the Minnesota Department of Health has warned workers' families that they too could have been exposed due to lead dust carried home on the work clothes, shoes, skin and hair of their family members.""The environmental experts at EMSL Analytical, Inc. are dedicated to identifying and protecting workers and the public from the hazards associated with lead exposure. They offer testing services and sampling supplies for air, dust, bulk and water samples. They even provide an easy-to-use Lead in Paint & Dust Test Kit and a Drinking Water Test Kit that can be found at <http://www.EMSLTestKits.com>. EMSL has also sponsored an online video about lead exposure risks in the work environment that can be seen at <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TrZXm-o6cvo>.To learn more about lead or other indoor air quality, occupational, environmental, health, and safety testing services, please visit <http://www.EMSL.com>, call (800) 220-3675, or email <info@EMSL.com>.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Although this shipyard is located in Superior, Wisconsin, there are workers that come from Minnesota to work at the shipyard.Lead serves no useful purpose in the human body, but its presence in the body can lead to toxic effects, regardless of exposure pathway.Lead toxicity can affect every organ system, including the kidneys, the neurological system, and the reproductive system. In children, development may be adversely affected.Other possible effects of lead may include problems with the development and health of bones. At high levels, lead can result in slowed growth in children. Studies have shown increased likelihood of osteoporosis (weakened bones later in life) in animals exposed to lead. A review of this issue can be found in the following reference (Puzas et al. 1992. Osteoblasts and chondrocytes are important target cells for the toxic effects of lead. Neurotoxicology 13:800). Although this link has not been established in humans, it is likely that upon closer examination of lead-exposed individuals, lead will be shown to be a new risk factor for the disease. Research currently underway may provide more information about potential impacts of lead on osteoporosis (bone health) in the future.There are a number different treatments available, including succimer (dimercaptosuccinic acid or DMSA), edetate (EDTA), calcium disodium (CaNa2 EDTA), and there is a product that is not approved by FDA but may be helpful: D-penicillamine.A review of lead intoxication can be found in the moderator's comments on ProMED-mail posting ""Lead poisoning - USA (NC) 20161228.4729158."" - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/250>.]
