Eurosurveillance Edition 2017, 22(11) [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22738>Ref: Weststrate AC, Knapen D, Laverman GD, et al: Increasing evidence of tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) virus transmission, the Netherlands, June 2016. Euro Surveill. 2017;22(11): pii=30482. doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2017.22.11.30482----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------We present a case of endemic tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) occurring in June 2016 in the eastern part of the Netherlands in an area where a strain of TBE virus, genetically different from the common TBE virus strains in Europe, was reported in ticks in 2016. With the start of the tick season in spring, this 2nd autochthonous Dutch TBE case should remind physicians to consider the possibility of endemic TBE in patients with respective symptoms.[Introduction]--------------We report the 2nd autochthonous human case of tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) ever diagnosed in the Netherlands in an area where a strain of TBE virus, genetically different from the common TBE virus strains in Europe, was identified in ticks in 2016.Background----------In Europe, areas of risk for TBE are predominantly situated in central and eastern Europe, and the Baltic and northern countries. In the Netherlands, TBE was only considered as an imported disease until the 1st case of autochthonous TBE was reported, occurring in June 2016, shortly before our case. In the 1st case, the virus was recovered and showed strong homology with the common TBEV-Eu strains that cause disease in Europe. The infection likely occurred in a forested area between Driebergen en Maarn, in the province of Utrecht. There was no link to the Sallandse heuvelrug region, in the province of Overijssel, which was at that time the only region in the Netherlands known to harbour TBEV infected ticks. There are currently no proven infections described with the TBE-Eu strain of the Sallandse heuvelrug, which is genetically distinct from the common TBE-Eu strains.Discussion----------We present a confirmed case of TBE, according to the European Union case definition (symptoms of meningoencephalitis combined with a rise in TBEV-specific antibody titres). The typical biphasic clinical course in our case fits the diagnosis TBE. Vomiting, a prominent symptom in our case, is usually not described in association with TBE, nor is tinnitus.Chances are high that the TBEV infection was acquired in the Sallandse heuvelrug region [Overijssel]. The patient was bitten by a tick in that region during the incubation phase, which ranges from 4 to 28 days (average 7-10 days), and he had neither been in the Utrechtse heuvelrug region, nor in a TBEV-endemic area abroad. His visit to Bad Salzungen was 2 weeks before the maximum incubation time of 28 days, it lasted only shortly, and was without at-risk activities. Moreover, Bad Salzungen is not regarded one of the risk areas in Germany.Conclusion----------This is the 1st described case of TBE associated with the Sallandse heuvelrug region, where TBEV is endemic in ticks. Yet, definite proof that the infection was caused by the specific TBEV-Eu strain from that region is lacking. Being the 2nd autochthonous TBE case in the Netherlands, however, it provides more evidence for endemic TBEV transmission in this country. With the new tick season approaching, clinicians in the Netherlands should consider TBE in the differential diagnosis of patients with meningoencephalitis symptoms especially after a tick bite, even if there has been no recent travel to a known TBE-endemic country.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[One wonders if this newly recognized area where the case occurred is indicative of recent establishment of a rodent-tick transmission cycle in the area, or if that cycle has been present at previously undetected low levels without human cases. Presumably the virus is transmitted there by _Ixodes_ species, primarily _I. ricinus_ in Europe.As noted in the previous post, although there were 2 TBE human cases imported into the Netherlands from Austria in 2011 (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20111107.3318), the case in Utrecht was the 1st locally acquired one. Interestingly, a 1 Jul 2016 report indicated that Dutch health institute RIVM (National Institute for Public Health) issued a warning over a tick-related virus that popped up in the Netherlands and is new to that country (<http://www.nltimes.nl/2016/07/01/new-virus-warnings-released-ahead-tick-season/>). The RIVM discovered the virus in deer that live on Sallandse Heuvelrug.Tickborne encephalitis is a viral infection caused by 1 of 3 tickborne encephalitis virus (TBEV) subtypes belonging to the Flaviviridae family: Central European, Siberian, and Far Eastern (formerly known as Russian spring-summer encephalitis). It is transmitted to humans through the bite of infected _Ixodes_ ticks.Usually symptoms appear 7 to 14 days after being bitten by an infected tick. Symptoms can last up to 8 days and include fever, headache, fatigue, muscle pain, nausea, and loss of appetite. Approximately 1/3 of patients develop severe symptoms after the 1st phase of the illness where the virus causes meningitis (attacks the thin lining that surrounds the brain and the spinal cord) and/or encephalitis (swelling of the brain). 2nd phase symptoms include stiff neck, fever, headache, nausea, sensitivity to light, confusion, disorientation, drowsiness, behavioural changes, seizures, and paralysis. Some patients may experience long-term complications such as memory loss, speech and language problems, mood disorders, epilepsy, fatigue, and motor skill difficulties. Treatment of the acute infection includes supportive care of symptoms.The paragraph above is excerpted from <https://www.iamat.org/country/germany/risk/tick-borne-encephalitis>. - Mod. TYMaps of the Netherlands can be seen at <http://www.map-of-netherlands.co.uk/images/netherlands-politcal-map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/58972>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
