The Topeka Capital-Journal [edited]<http://cjonline.com/news/local/local-government/2017-03-16/mumps-outbreak-leads-dozens-kansas-cases-none-shawnee-county>A nationwide outbreak of mumps included dozens of cases in Kansas, but so far no cases have been reported in Shawnee County.Carrie Delfs, of the Shawnee County Health Department on Thu 16 Mar 2017 briefed the county health board composed of the 3 county commissioners about the recent outbreak of the disease, which causes fever and swelling of the salivary glands. In 2016, more than 5000 people across the country reported mumps, she said. From 1 Jan through 25 Feb 2017, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported an additional 1077 cases.In Kansas, there have been 56 cases reported in 12 counties, Delfs said.Mumps has been most common on college campuses, where the disease is easily spread through coughing, sneezing and talking, said Gianfranco Pezzino, the county's health officer. Lawrence has reported 14 cases, according to statistics shared during the Thu 16 Mar 2017 meeting. Pittsburg reported 8 cases, while Manhattan had 3.With few exceptions, including those for religious beliefs, most children are required to have at least 2 doses of the mumps vaccine before kindergarten. A 2-dose regiment is successful at preventing the disease about 88 percent of the time, but Pezzino said it is likely the vaccine begins to wear off by young adulthood.Before the mumps vaccination program began in 1967, about 186 000 cases were reported each year, but the actual number of cases was likely much higher because of underreporting, according to the CDC. The 2016/2017 outbreak is the largest since 2006.So far, Delfs said, there have been no cases reported in Shawnee County, but the disease can easily be spread in populations that haven't been fully vaccinated.Mumps can't be treated with antibiotics because it is caused by a virus, but most cases clear within 2 weeks. In more extreme cases, mumps may lead to swelling in the brain and around the spinal cord, which can cause serious complications, including hearing loss.[Byline: Luke Ranker]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] LouisianaDate: Sat 18 Mar 2017Source: Myarklamiss [edited]<http://www.myarklamiss.com/news/local-news/louisiana-beginning-to-see-cases-of-mumps/673942529>The Louisiana Department of Health reports that cases of mumps are beginning to appear in Louisiana. As of Wed [15 Mar 2017], there have been 12 cases of mumps reported by the LDH Office of Public Health.""There has been a large outbreak of mumps cases in Arkansas, and we're starting to see cases in Louisiana now,"" said Dr. Frank Welch, medical director of the state Immunization Program, Louisiana Department of Health.The 1st cluster of cases has been identified at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge. The university is taking extra precautions to prevent the spread among students and faculty. The Louisiana Department of Health has shared health alerts and education to remind health care providers, schools and universities about the signs and symptoms of mumps.""Our Louisiana culture is rich with festivals and celebrations including many scheduled for St. Patrick's Day this weekend. Large gatherings create an environment where germs and contagious illnesses spread easily,"" said Dr. Jimmy Guidry, State Health Officer, LDH. ""This is a great time to remind everyone to take proper precautions to avoid getting sick.""The Louisiana Department of Health offers these reminders to avoid the spread of infection:- Do not share drinks, utensils, or food.- Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze.- Clean surfaces that are frequently touched (such as toys, doorknobs, tables, counters, etc.) with soap and water or with cleaning wipes regularly.- Wash your hands frequently with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand cleaner.- If you have symptoms, stay at home for 5 days after symptoms begin; avoid school, work or large group settings.Symptoms of mumps include:- Fever- Headache- Muscle aches- Tiredness- Loss of appetite- Swollen and tender salivary glands under the ears on one or both sidesDr. Welch added that a person who has the mumps virus may not know they are ill because it can take several weeks after the infection until the symptoms occur.""The infectious period is the time during which an infected person can spread the disease to others. People are most infectious from 1-2 days before onset of symptoms until 5 days after they notice inflammation of their salivary glands,"" Welch added. ""It is for this reason that we advise these safe sharing precautions, especially at a time when people gather in large groups.""Visit <http://www.ldh.la.gov/mumps for more information about mumps> for more information.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] PennsylvaniaDate: Thu 16 Mar 2017Source: The Inquirer Daily News [edited]<http://www.philly.com/philly/health/Do-Penn-State-mumps-cases-mean-college-students-need-more-shots-cdc-acip.html>As Pennsylvania State University copes with an ongoing outbreak of mumps, infectious-disease experts are investigating why vaccinated young people are getting sick and whether a booster shot would help.""We didn't see outbreaks like this 10 years ago,"" said Kelly L. Moore, director of the Tennessee Immunization Project and chair of the mumps work group for the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Its vaccination recommendations become official policy for the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention when approved by the CDC director.The government already recommends 2 shots, given at 12 to 15 months and just before entering school. The 2nd shot was added in 1989.In recent outbreaks, public health authorities have suggested a 3rd dose for people in affected communities. Penn State recently began suggesting shots for several hundred students it deemed at high risk for mumps exposure.Penn State had its 1st case on 29 Jan 2017 and had 36 probable or confirmed cases on 3 Mar 2017, just before students headed out for spring break.The total is now 45, said Shelley Haffner, infectious-disease manager at Penn State's student health center. She said the school would have a vaccination clinic on Thu [16 Mar 2017]. Students will be expected to submit the cost of the vaccine, which the school is still working out, to their insurance companies. The MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) vaccine usually costs about USD 150, she said.All but one of the students with mumps symptoms has had at least one dose of the vaccine, Haffner said. The 1st student to become ill was fully vaccinated. Students are supposed to have 2 doses before entering the university, but some may not have had them at the correct age, she said.The Pennsylvania Department of Health said Wed [15 Mar 2017] that it was not aware of mumps cases at any other Pennsylvania colleges.Experts in 2012 decided that the evidence for a 3rd shot was ""inconclusive,"" Moore said. Now, because of multiple outbreaks of mumps over the last 2 years, the CDC and ACIP are studying the issue again. A recommendation is expected next year [2018], she said.Her group had its 1st meeting last month [February 2017], so it doesn't have answers yet, but it will investigate a lot of questions. Those include whether and how much the vaccine's effectiveness wanes over time and whether a 3rd dose could help prevent or shorten outbreaks. Another question is whether the vaccine's formula, which has been based on the same strain of virus since it was introduced in 1967, needs tweaking. Most of the current cases involve a different strain of mumps.Outbreaks since 2006 have occurred in well-vaccinated groups, including college and high school students.Before the mumps vaccine was developed, there were about 186 000 cases a year in the United States. Not all were reported then, so the CDC said the actual numbers were likely much higher. Since then, there have been many years when only a couple of hundred cases were reported.But there was a spike in cases in 2006, mainly among college students in the Midwest. That year, 6500 people got sick.There was another spike last year [2016], with more than 5000 cases reported. As of the end of February 2017, 1077 cases had been reported this year [2017].Trish Perl, an infectious-disease doctor at the University of Texas who is on the board of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, said there was some evidence that the vaccine becomes less effective over time.""That is probably contributing to the outbreaks we've been seeing,"" said Kristen Feemster, director of research for the Vaccine Education Center at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.Giving 3rd doses during outbreaks is becoming more common, but it's not clear how effective that is. ""Mumps is really a pretty infectious disease,"" and it takes 2 weeks after a shot for increased immunity to kick in, Perl said.Effectiveness of the vaccine is estimated at 77 percent after one dose and 88 percent after 2.People infected with the virus can spread it for 2-3 days before they have symptoms and 5 days after. The incubation period is long -- 16 to 18 days -- and some infected patients never have symptoms.Outbreaks in the last decade have mainly been among vaccinated people who belong to groups with frequent, close contact. ""The other thing that plays a role,"" Moore said, ""is how intense and prolonged is your exposure to the virus."" College students, who live and go to class in groups and may exchange saliva through kissing and sharing of drinks, are prime candidates for exposure. The disease largely has not spread to wider communities.In most people, mumps causes relatively mild symptoms such as fever, headache, muscle aches, fatigue, and lack of appetite. The classic symptom is swelling and tenderness of the glands just below or in front of the ear or jaw.Mumps can occasionally cause more severe complications, including inflammation of the testicles, brain, tissues covering the brain and ovaries as well as deafness.Perl and Moore both pointed out that vaccinated mumps victims have far fewer complications than those who have not gotten the shots. Haffner said that only one Penn State student has had a mumps complication and that did not require hospitalization.Before vaccination, 12 percent to 50 percent of male mumps victims got testicular inflammation, Perl said. Three percent to 10 percent of boys and men who have been vaccinated get it. The percentage who suffered hearing loss has fallen from 4 percent to one percent or less, according to the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, a CDC publication. The percentage needing hospitalization fell from 5.5 percent to 1-2 percent.""The cases that we're seeing now have far lower complication rates,"" Moore said. ""We're not seeing people with serious illness in the hospital worrying about lifelong consequences.""[Byline: Stacey Burling]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>
