Lancaster Farming [edited]<http://www.lancasterfarming.com/farming/dairy/swine-brucellosis-outbreak-in-new-york/article_d1b75a7e-a75f-5ab8-933a-b0df686aa82d.html>In April 2016, the New York State Department of Agriculture & Markets was notified by the New York State Department of Health of a human case of _Brucella suis_.The patient's symptoms were chronic tiredness, intermittent fever, joint pain, and respiratory distress. Antibiotic treatment lasted for weeks.With this kind of ailment, symptoms may return several months after treatment concludes and symptoms may appear anywhere from 5 days to 5 months from exposure.Where did this infection come from if New York is brucellosis free? Isn't the US free of brucellosis? The answer to those questions is yes, the US is free of the disease in commercial herds.But there are other production methods and other potential sources for the bacteria. Pasture-raised farms have pigs outdoors. These pigs may have access to feral hogs. Could these outdoor pigs or feral pigs been the source for the human infection?The person infected was assisting with farrowing on the family's farm in Schoharie County. The diagnosis was made via blood culture, testing positive for _B. suis_ biotype 1. The pasture-raised swine had no known contact with feral hogs.The USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service's Wildlife Services was called in to assist. All adult breeding hogs on the farm were tested with 7 of the 29 hogs testing positive on multiple tests for the same strain.All but 2 that tested negative were humanely euthanized due to zoonotic -- human transmission -- risk. The 2 remaining hogs were kept under quarantine for ""testing out.""In swine, brucellosis infection causes reproductive issues such as infertility, abortion, stillborn or weak piglets, testicular swelling, and reluctance to mate. There may also be signs of lameness with painful, swollen joints. It may be transmitted through breeding or ingestion of urine or placentas, aborted fetuses, or uterine fluids.The farm had sold feeder pigs or breeding stock to numerous farms with 4 herds testing positive for _B. suis_ biotype 1. 2 were in New York -- Schoharie and Rensselaer counties -- 1 herd was in Virginia, and 1 herd was in New Jersey. They were all pasture-raised operations.The initial infected farm purchased a breeding boar from a farm in Washington County, New York. Back in 2004, the Washington County farm observed a feral boar gain access and breed 2 sows, and then escape. Both sows had litters that sold as feeders or directly to restaurants. The farm kept 1 pig from each litter -- male and female.The breeding boar died in 2014 but the sow farrowed multiple litters. Over 78 percent of the herd tested positive for brucellosis -- 59 of 75. They had sold or shared hogs with multiple farms.A total of 50 herds in 13 states were investigated. 9 brucellosis-infected herds were found, all pasture-raised swine, with 6 infected herds in New York: 2 in Schoharie County, 1 in Rensselaer County, and 3 in Washington County.As of [26 Sep 2016], all known infected and exposed pigs had been depopulated. These farms received indemnity paid by the New York State Department of Agriculture & Markets and the USDA.The farm owners performed dry cleaning on their premises and then disinfected with Virkon. Pastures were required to be fallow for 60 to 120 days. Restocking of the herds was done from validated herds, those that had tested brucellosis free.There were 2 strains of _B. suis_ identified from this outbreak.Was the strain around a long time, opening the possibility for variation? Were there multiple sources of infected pigs? What's the takeaway message here?Biosecurity and traceability are important, especially when it comes to diseases such as brucellosis.Here are some other biosecurity tips:- feral hog populations need to be kept away from domestic hogs with secure fencing;- avoid sharing breeding boars between herds or have the boar tested for brucellosis before using him for breeding;- purchase only tested animals or animals from validated free herds (herds that undergo routine testing for brucellosis);- isolate newly purchased animals for 30 days and consider retesting them for brucellosis before using them for breeding or mixing them with the rest of the herd. Don't borrow or lend disease to your neighbor;- avoid sharing equipment that comes in contact with animals. Thoroughly clean and disinfect all equipment that is borrowed;- practice good herd hygiene. Do not feed aborted fetuses and placenta to other pigs or dogs;- keep equipment clean including transport trailers, chutes; and other tools for handling swine;- thoroughly clean feed and water troughs before reusing with another group of animals;- practice good manure management and remove manure as each group cycles through, or sooner if needed;- keep yourself safe, too. Wear protective clothing such as coveralls or barrier aprons and rubber boots when working with swine;- thoroughly clean and disinfect your boots and apron when you are finished and wash your coveralls;- Be very careful when handling aborted fetuses or placentas, or when assisting with farrowing;- use rubber gloves, safety goggles, and a mask to cover your nose and mouth.- Afterward, wash thoroughly with soap and water, paying close attention to any areas where birth products have accidentally touched your skin or soaked through your clothing;- During cooking and food prep, avoid eating under-cooked meat and wash your hands thoroughly after handling raw meat.[Byline: Nancy Glazier, Cornell Extension]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Brucellosis in people has many other names, including Malta fever, and undulating fever. The fever associated with this disease seems to be present for a few days and then gone for a few days only to return again. This cycle repeats. In other words, a recurrent fever.In addition to the recurrent fever the patients with this disease experience malaise, fatigue, headaches, anorexia, and body pain, often in the back, legs, joints, and spine. The pain and recurrent fever and sweats and general malaise often produce depression. The abdomen may be tender to painful as the liver and/or spleen generally swell with this disease.Sadly as in this case, physicians believe the state is free of this bacterial disease and it is often not their differential radar. However, if it is diagnosed, this bacterial disease can be treated with antibiotics. The combination of rifampin and doxycycline generally works well. Treatment may be needed for as long as 6-8 weeks depending on the patient and how long the bacteria have been propagating the human being. There are cases where patients have been on antibiotic therapy for a couple of months.Regardless of the state designation of a disease, this disease and others should be on the differential list. Diseases travel widely in this age of jetting about our global community.This article raises some good points on biosecurity of farm raised swine and trading or loaning boars. Wild boars are notorious for getting through a variety of fencing to breed with sows. This article should serve as a warning to all pasture raised swine to continually check fences and to test your animals on a regular basis.However, the article does not tell us if all the herds found with brucellosis were depopulated, or what the status is of the herds mentioned in this article. We know one herd was tested and all but 2 animals were depopulated, but what about the other herds mentioned? - Mod.TGThe state of New York can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/50813>. A county map can be seen at <http://geology.com/county-map/new-york-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
