CBS Detroit [edited]<http://detroit.cbslocal.com/2017/03/24/officials-hepatitis-a-is-on-the-rise-in-southeast-michigan/>State health officials are alerting the public about a rise in cases of hepatitis A, a vaccine-preventable disease. The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services says there's been an 8-fold increase in the cases of hepatitis A over the past year in southeast Michigan. From [1 Aug 2016] to [21 Mar 2017], officials say 107 cases of laboratory-confirmed hepatitis A have been reported in Macomb, Oakland, and Wayne counties, and the city of Detroit.Ages of the cases range from 22 to 86 years, with an average age of 45 years. The majority of the cases have been male; 85 percent of the cases have been hospitalized with 2 deaths reported. Approximately one-third of the cases have a history of substance abuse, and 16 percent of all cases are co-infected with hepatitis C. No common sources of infection have been identified.""Together with our local health partners, we are increasing outreach to vulnerable populations to raise awareness and promote vaccination of hepatitis A,"" Dr. Eden Wells, the state's chief medical executive said in a statement. ""Those who live, work, or play in the city of Detroit, as well as Macomb, Oakland, and Wayne counties are urged to get vaccinated for hepatitis A and talk to their healthcare provider about their risks.""While the hepatitis A vaccine is recommended as part of the routine childhood vaccination schedule, most adults have not been vaccinated and may be susceptible to the hepatitis A virus. Individuals with hepatitis A are infectious for 2 weeks prior to symptom onset. Symptoms of hepatitis A include jaundice (yellowing of the skin), fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dark urine, and light-colored stools. Symptoms usually appear over a number of days and last less than 2 months; however, some people can be ill for as long as 6 months. Hepatitis A can sometimes cause liver failure and death.Risk factors for a hepatitis A infection include living with someone who has hepatitis A, having sexual contact with someone who has hepatitis A, or sharing injection or non-injection illegal drugs with someone who has hepatitis A. The hepatitis A virus can also be transmitted through contaminated food or water.The health department encourages residents in the city of Detroit and Macomb, Oakland, and Wayne counties to check their hepatitis A vaccination status and talk to their healthcare provider about their risks for hepatitis A.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Hepatitis A virus immunization is now part of universal childhood immunization but a great majority of the cases have occurred in adults who were not likely to have been immunized previously. In 2016, ProMED posted twice about HAV infections in Michigan (see below), once related to sewage exposure and the other restaurant-related. It is most likely that the increase in cases in the state is multifactorial but it is not known whether isolates of the virus have been shown to be genetically-related or not. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/225>.]
