Disease Outbreak News [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/23-march-2017-ah7n9-china/en/>On [17 Mar 2017], the National Health and Family Planning Commission of China (NHFPC) notified WHO of 22 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in mainland China.Details of the cases--------------------Onset dates ranged from 28 Feb to 13 Mar 2017. Of these 22 cases, only 2 were female. The median age is 52.5 years (age range among the cases is 33 to 77 years old). The cases were reported from Chongqing (1), Fujian (1) Guangdong (3), Guangxi (6), Guizhou (3), Henan (2), Hunan (5), and Jiangxi (1). Of the 6 cases reported from Guangxi province, 5 were from the same city (Hechi).At the time of notification, there were 3 deaths, and 17 cases were diagnosed as either pneumonia (6) or severe pneumonia (11). The clinical presentations of 2 cases were not available at time of notification. A total of 19 cases were reported to have had exposure to poultry or live poultry market and 3 cases are still under investigation. No clusters were reported.To date [23 Mar 2017], a total of 1329 laboratory-confirmed human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported through IHR notification since early 2013.Public health response----------------------Considering the increase in the number of human cases since December 2016, the Chinese government at national and local levels is taking further measures including:- Continuing to strengthen control measures with a focus on hygienic management of live poultry markets and cross-regional transportation.- Assessing and analysing the avian influenza A(H7N9) epidemic trend to guide control measures in the provinces.- Increasing attention and guidance to Guangxi and Hunan provinces in epidemic control and prevention.- Conducting public risk communication and increasing information publicity to provide the public with guidance on self-protection.WHO risk assessment-------------------The number of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) in the 5th epidemic wave (i.e. onset since [1 Oct 2016]) is greater than the numbers of human cases reported in earlier waves.Human infections with the avian influenza A(H7N9) virus remain unusual. Close observation of the epidemiological situation and further characterization of the most recent human viruses are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.Most human cases are exposed to avian influenza A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, and live poultry vending continues, further human cases can be expected. Although small clusters of cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported including those involving patients in the same ward, current epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. Therefore the likelihood of further community level spread is considered low.WHO advice----------WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid, if possible, poultry farms, contact with animals in live poultry markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water, and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling in or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and influenza-like illness (ILI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR 2005, and continue national health preparedness actions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Henan case reportDate: Fri 24 Mar 2017, 19:49 PMSource: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited]<http://www.flu.org.cn/en/news_detail?action=ql&uid=MjI0OA&pd=YXRsbXBw&newsId=19185>A human H7N9 AIV case has been reported in Gushi county of Xinyang city in Henan province. The 75-year-old male patient lived in Gushi county and was admitted into Henan Xinhe hospital on the afternoon of [15 Mar 2017]. He was transferred to the ICU ward on [18 Mar 2017] and died on 00:15 of [21 Mar 2017].--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Control effortsDate: Tue 21 Mar 2017, 9:51 AMSource: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] <http://www.flu.org.cn/en/news-19178.html>A resurgent outbreak of a new strain of avian influenza that can be lethal for humans underscores the need for robust and rapid detection and response systems at animal source. This would reduce the risk associated with virus spread and impacts on public health, according to FAO and OIE.Human cases of the H7N9 virus, 1st detected in China 4 years ago, have suddenly increased since December 2016. It is estimated, that as of early March 2017, there have been more reported human cases of influenza A (H7N9) than those caused by other types of avian influenza viruses (H5N1, H5N6, etc.) combined.As during previous waves, most of the patients infected reported a history of visiting live bird markets or coming into contact with infected birds. Since 2013, China has invested heavily in surveillance of live bird markets and poultry farms. However the surveillance of this virus has proven particularly challenging as until recently it has shown no or few signs of disease in chickens.""Considering the potential for mutation of avian influenza virus, constant surveillance by national Veterinary Services of the different strains circulating in animals in their country is essential to protect both animal and human health"", explains Dr Matthew Stone, Deputy Director General of the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). ""To protect human health and people's livelihoods, it is essential to tackle the disease at its source in poultry: efforts need to target eliminating H7N9 from affected farms and markets,"" said Dr Vincent Martin, FAO's Representative in China. ""Targeted surveillance to detect the disease and clean infected farms and live bird markets, intervening at critical points along the poultry value chain - from farm to table - is required. There should be incentives for everybody involved in poultry production and marketing to enforce disease control.""Until recently, H7N9 has demonstrated low pathogenicity, meaning it may cause mild or no illnesses in poultry. New evidence from China's Guangdong Province now indicates that H7N9, while retaining its capacity to also cause severe disease in humans, has shifted to high pathogenicity in poultry, a genetic change that can lead to high mortality for birds within 48 hours of infection. That may potentially make it easier to see when chickens are infected, facilitate introduction of control measures also at the farm level, but also raises the risk of severe animal and economic losses for those engaged in poultry production and sales.""China has been quick to notify international organizations about the virus' recent change from low to high pathogenicity in poultry. Given the continuous risk of virus change, inherent to all influenza viruses, timely sharing of surveillance results and sequence information with the international community is crucial for pandemic preparedness,"" said Dr Stone.The need for ongoing targeted and widespread monitoring and effective response to detections remains urgent to keep the virus from spreading beyond China's Eastern and Southeastern regions, where it is now considered endemic. This strain of H7N9 virus has so far not been notified in poultry populations outside of China despite intensified surveillance in neighbouring countries and those at risk. Neighbouring countries remain at high risk, and all those that have poultry trade connections - either formal or informal - to China. A further concern is the possibility that changes seen in the H7N9 virus may affect wild bird population, posing risks to their health or turn them into migratory carriers of the virus, expanding the risk of the virus spreading further as has been seen with other avian influenza strains in faraway Europe, Africa or the Americas.In response to the latest surge of cases, China's Ministry of Agriculture has ordered animal husbandry, veterinary and public health officers, as well as authorities in charge of industry and commerce, to take timely and closely coordinated actions so that H7N9 cases can be identified quickly and appropriate measures taken. Culling of affected flocks is required and increased hygiene at live-bird markets is being enforced. The Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, recognised by OIE and FAO as an international reference centre, which serves as the National Avian Influenza Research Laboratory and its countrywide laboratory network are closely monitoring for virus mutations and epidemic status.Biosecurity measures and surveillance-------------------------------------While more than 1200 human cases of H7N9 have been reported since 2013, there is no danger of catching the disease by eating chicken. Livelihoods reliant on poultry, however, are at serious risk due to the necessary prevention and control measures and losses are destined to increase, as chicken will be vulnerable to the emerging high-pathogenic strain.China's Ministry of Agriculture is calling once more for improved biosecurity in markets, forbidding birds from remaining overnight to avoid accumulation of virus, enforcing market rest days, closures and regular cleaning, which is essential in responding to the disease, especially in preventing human exposure.With all the efforts taken by China and partners, there is a pressing need to understand why these measures have not worked as well as expected and to undertake more outreach efforts to work with the poultry industry to institute safer practices, farmer registries, hygienic market practices, targeted surveillance and timely reporting.""Following a ""One Health"" approach, we need to understand the drivers of this disease and in devising appropriate control and preventive strategies and longer-term management programs"", said Dr Juan Lubroth, FAO Chief Veterinary Officer. ""These must be tailored to meet the expectations of all stakeholders involved, such as farmers, traders, transporters, market operators, government and international agencies and the consumer.""FAO and OIE emphasize the importance of making all information from ongoing and intensified surveillance activities in China available in a timely way. Such data are essential to the coordinated global effort to understand avian influenza in all its types, as well as to gauge H7N9's potential to spread along different poultry value chains or through wild bird movement. The 2 international organisations urge countries in the region to be vigilant for a potential incursion of the virus, in its low or highly pathogenic form, and are calling for urgent investment in surveillance and laboratory detection to safeguard trade, including across borders.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] Key genetic changesDate: Tue 21 Mar 2017Source: BBC News [edited]<http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-39339418>A change in just a single genetic ""letter"" of the flu virus allows bird flu to pass to humans, according to scientists. Monitoring birds for viruses that carry the change could provide early warning of risk to people, they say. Researchers at the University of Hong Kong studied a strain of bird flu that has caused human cases in China for several years. Birds carry many flu viruses, but only a few strains can cause human disease. H7N9 is a strain of bird flu that has caused more than 1000 infections in people in China, according to the World Health Organization.Most cases are linked to contact with infected poultry or live poultry markets. The change in a single nucleotide (a building block of RNA) allows the H7N9 virus to infect human cells as well as birds, say Prof Honglin Chen and colleagues. They say there is ""strong interest in understanding the mechanism underpinning the ability of this virus to cause human infections and identification of residues that support replication in mammalians cells is important for surveillance of circulating strains.""Dr Derek Gatherer, an expert on viruses at Lancaster University, UK, says more surveillance of bird flu viruses is needed. ""The recent flare-up of H7N9 bird flu in China has been the cause of some concern this winter, and the demonstration that the new replicative efficiency mutation is present in this strain is not good news,"" he told BBC News.""Also, the observation that this mutation has been present in other bird flu subtypes like H9N2 and spreading slowly for over 15 years shows that H7N9 isn't the only kind of bird flu that is potentially a pandemic risk for humans. We need to maintain a broader surveillance of bird flu to identify which strains have this mutation."" The research, published in the journal, Nature Communications, will help scientists understand more about how bird flu viruses adapt to infect humans.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[5] Potential biomarkerDate: Thu 23 Mar 2017, 10:49 AMSource: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited]<http://www.flu.org.cn/en/news_detail?action=ql&uid=MjI0OA&pd=YXRsbXBw&newsId=19180>The outbreak of H7N9 avian influenza virus was 1st reported in mainland China in 2013. Human cases of H7N9 have surged in several Provinces since the autumn of 2016, causing over 500 cases of human infection in China up to March 2017. The research team from State Key Laboratory for Emerging Infectious Diseases of The University of Hong Kong (HKU) and Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, HKU identifies a mutation in H7N9 virus which causes the virus to possess a higher ability to infect humans while continue to circulate effectively in poultry. The finding can help monitor the emergence of mutations for cross-species transmission among avian influenza virus including H7N9 virus and provide new target for anti-virus drug development. The research has been published in the international journal Nature Communications on [22 Mar 2017].Avian influenza virus---------------------Human infection with avian influenza A H5N1 subtype virus was 1st reported in Hong Kong in 1997. H5N1 avian influenza has since caused over 800 cases of human infection all over the world and death in nearly half of these cases. The outbreak of H7N9 avian influenza virus was 1st detected in Eastern China in 2013 and numerous human infection cases have been reported each year since then. Till early 2017, multiple cities from 17 Provinces in China have confirmed more than 1200 H7N9 human infection cases, causing over 400 deaths.Despite the live poultry markets in major cities of China have been closed since the 2013 outbreak, 121 deaths among the more than 380 H7N9 human infection cases were recorded in the 1st 3 months of 2017. Although other avian influenza viruses, such as H5N1 and H9N2 viruses have also caused human infections, the medical sector considers the H7N9 outbreak unusual. Yet the reason why H7N9 virus can circulate effectively in avian host and cause human infection is still poorly understood.Avian influenza A virus has to replicate in the cells of its host to establish effective infection. This mechanism does not only restrict infection and transmission of virus among various species, but also restrict the transmission of avian influenza A virus to mammals and humans. The seasonal influenza virus does not infect poultry and birds due to the mechanism.Research findings-----------------------The latest study published by the research team from State Key Laboratory for Emerging Infectious Diseases and Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, HKU, reveals the reason why H7N9 avian influenza virus possesses distinct fitness in circulating in avian host and causing human infections. The team performs analysis of the H7N9 virus genome collected from 2013 onwards and reveals that efficient infection of both avian and human cells by H7N9 viruses is supported by a unique nucleotide substitution (NS-G540A) in NS segment, where the mutation is located within a previously undefined exonic splicing enhancer (ESE). The researchers show that the position of this nucleotide is part of an RNA sequence motif that binds the human host cellular mechanism which supports virus replication and it is a common function in all influenza viruses. Host splicing regulator, SF2, regulates the virus replication efficiency as it interacts with ESE. Mutation in ESE identified in the viral genome of H7N9 virus enhances the ability of virus replication in mammalian cells.The team proves that this mutation in viral genome provides H7N9 virus with the ability to both circulate efficiently in avian hosts and replicate in mammalian cells. It is notable that human infections with H10N8 and H5N6 subtype avian influenza viruses contain the same mutation in the viral genome. This mutated nucleotide emerged in early 2000 in H9N2 strains and has since spread in avian influenza viruses, becoming the dominant genotype among avian influenza viruses from 2012 onwards. The H7N9 virus inherits the mutation from H9N2 virus. The 2013 H7N9 virus acquires internal genes from H9N2 virus and reassorts with haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) genes from viruses present in wild birds, becoming the H7N9 virus that currently causes human infection.Viruses that can infect humans are normally refrained from replication and transmission in avian cells. Yet the mutation in H7N9 virus can enhance the virus replication in mammalian and human cells, and causes no fitness cost for circulation of the virus in avian population. The mutation enables H7N9 virus to possess the cross-species transmission ability to infect humans. The primed condition of NS-G540A among H7N9 virus enhances replication ability in mammalian hosts and facilitates viral acquisition of other adaptive mutations during virus infection, which enables H7N9 virus to infect humans more effectively than other avian influenza viruses.Significance of the study-------------------------""This study provides a plausible mechanism to explain the molecular properties which allow H7N9 virus to infect humans while retaining the ability to circulate in avian species. It provides an important biomarker for monitoring the emergence and transmission of avian influenza viruses in humans and preventing human-to-human infection of the viruses. The mutation can also serve as a novel target of anti-influenza drug development,"" says Professor Chen Honglin, Professor of State Key Laboratory for Emerging Infectious Diseases and Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, HKU.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The avian Influenza A/H7N9 strain is rapidly evolving in to a formidable pathogen for poultry as well, while it continues to show high morbidity and mortality in infected humans. It is recommended to continue monitoring the virus in poultry and tracking genetic changes closely for any emergent highly transmissible variants to humans. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>.]
