WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://who.int/csr/don/28-march-2017-yellow-fever-suriname/en/#.WNz-SsAfTEo.email>On [Thu 9 Mar 2017], the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) in the Netherlands reported a case of yellow fever to WHO. The patient is a Dutch adult female traveler who visited Suriname from the middle of February until early March 2017. She was not vaccinated against yellow fever.The case was confirmed for yellow fever in the Netherlands by RT-PCR in 2 serum samples taken with an interval of 3 days at the Erasmus University Medical Center (Erasmus MC), Rotterdam. The presence of yellow fever virus was confirmed on Thu 9 Mar 2017 by PCR and sequencing at Erasmus MC, and by PCR on a different target at the Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.While in Suriname, the patient spent nights in Paramaribo and visited places around Paramaribo, including the districts of Commewijne (Frederiksdorp and Peperpot) and Brokopondo (Brownsberg), the latter is considered to be the most probable place of infection. She experienced onset of symptoms (headache and high fever) on Tue 28 Feb 2017 and was admitted to an intensive care unit (University Medical Center) in the Netherlands on Fri 3 Mar 2017 with liver failure. The patient is currently in critical condition.Suriname is considered an area at risk for yellow fever and requires a yellow fever vaccination certificate at entry for travelers over one year of age arriving from countries with risk of yellow fever, according to the WHO list of countries with risk of yellow fever transmission; WHO also recommends yellow fever vaccination to all travelers aged 9 months and older. This is the 1st reported case of yellow fever in Suriname since 1972.Public health responseThis report of a yellow fever case in the Netherlands with travel history to Suriname has triggered further investigations. Following this event, health authorities in Suriname have implemented several measures to investigate and respond to a potential outbreak in their country, including: - Enhancing vaccination activity to increase vaccination coverage among residents. Suriname will continue with its national vaccination programme and will focus on the district of Brokopondo. A catch-up vaccination campaign is also being conducted to increase coverage in Brownsweg. - Enhancing epidemiologic and entomologic surveillance including strengthening laboratory capacity. - Implementing vector control activities in the district Brokopondo. - Carrying out a survey of dead monkeys in the suspected areas. - Conducting social mobilization to eliminate _Aedes aegypti_ breeding sites (e.g. by covering water containers/ barrels). - Issuing a press release to alert the public. - Mapping of the suspect area of Brownsweg, as well as the Peperpot Resort.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This case would suggest local transmission of yellow fever in Suriname which isn't surprising given the on-going outbreak in Brazil. This case would also suggest travelers to the area consider getting vaccinated for yellow fever prior to entering the country. One wonders if perhaps the local wildlife may be acting as a reservoir as well based on the outbreaks seen in monkeys in Brazil. - Mod.JHA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/104>.]
