PAHO/WHO [edited]<http://www2.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=13098%3Abrazil-control-yellow-fever-outbreak-paho-support&catid=740%3Apress-releases&Itemid=1926&lang=en>Brazil is carrying out mass vaccination campaigns for yellow fever in the states of Minas Gerais, Espirito Santo, Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Bahia, while strengthening surveillance and case management throughout the country since an outbreak of sylvatic yellow fever began in January [2017]. More than 18.8 million doses of vaccine have been distributed, in addition to routine immunization efforts.The Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) is providing specialized technical cooperation to the federal authorities managing the outbreak and has mobilized more than 15 experts, including experts from the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN), in disease control, surveillance, virology, immunization and other fields to collaborate with health officials in the affected states. These experts have been operating with field teams in surveillance, response, and control operations in Minas Gerais, Espirito Santo and Rio de Janeiro States.Brazil's Ministry of Health has reported 492 confirmed cases of yellow fever as of 24 Mar [2017], with 162 confirmed deaths. Another 1101 suspected cases are under investigation. A total of 1324 epizootics, or deaths from yellow fever in [non-human] primates, have been reported to the Ministry of Health, and 387 of these were confirmed by laboratory or epidemiological link, while 432 others are still being investigated.So far, in the 4 states with confirmed yellow fever human cases -- Minas Gerais, Espirito Santo, Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo -- all cases have been linked to transmission through the jungle mosquito species [in the genera of] _Haemagogus_ and _Sabethes_. But confirmed cases in humans and monkeys in municipalities close to large urban areas indicate a potential risk of urbanization, and yellow fever activity has increased in ecosystems of tropical and sub-tropical forests that are close to human populations.Officials are working to contain the virus so it does not spread to cities where it could infect _Aedes aegypti_ urban mosquitoes. Until now, there is no evidence of human cases of yellow fever virus infection transmitted by that mosquito.Case numbers have been declining in Minas Gerais and Espirito Santo, but close monitoring of cases is continuing, and Brazil is strengthening its capacity to quickly detect and treat cases of yellow fever. Vector-borne diseases have a seasonal characteristic in tropical areas, and it is expected that new cases will diminish during dry and cold weather seasons.Yellow fever can be prevented by means of an effective, and affordable live attenuated virus vaccine. PAHO/WHO recommends only one dose of the vaccine, which is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. The yellow fever vaccine is contraindicated in seriously immunosuppressed individuals. People over the age of 60 should only receive a vaccine after a careful risk-benefit assessment. The yellow fever vaccine should not be given to pregnant women -- except those with high risk of infection and situations where there is an expressed recommendation from health authorities -- or to infants aged less than 6 months, or to people with acute febrile illness.PAHO/WHO currently recommends that countries prioritize for vaccination populations living in endemic areas and travelers to these areas, and that they expand vaccination to the routine vaccination of children at the national level if vaccines are available. It is important that countries share YF vaccination coverage estimates at the local level for children and adults in order to inform an accurate risk assessment of the current situation.Mass immunization campaigns have started in the affected states. Federal public health authorities in Brazil have distributed 18.8 million doses of yellow fever vaccine since January [2017] to the states and municipalities in the areas where cases have been reported. These include the states of Minas Gerais, Espirito Santo, Sao Paulo, Bahia, and Rio de Janeiro. This effort is in addition to the country's routine yellow fever vaccine programs in 19 states, which included 3.7 million doses of vaccine.The extra vaccines include 3.5 million doses of yellow fever vaccine that Brazil requested from the emergency stockpile held by the International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision, and have arrived in the country. The ICG includes 4 agencies: the World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), and Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF).The WHO Secretariat recommends vaccination against yellow fever at least 10 days prior to travel for travelers going to areas in Brazil where there is risk of yellow fever transmission, including the State of Rio de Janeiro, with the exception of the urban areas of Rio de Janeiro City and Niteroi, and the State of Sao Paulo, with the exception of the urban areas of Sao Paulo City and Campinas. The WHO Secretariat recommends vaccination in the whole states of Espirito Santo and Minas Gerais. The information is being continuously updated.Sylvatic yellow fever is endemic in areas of 13 countries and territories of the region, including Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, Panama, Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana and the island of Trinidad. In Brazil, 21 of the 27 states and the Federal District are considered to have areas at risk for yellow fever transmission. Globally, 47 countries have areas with endemic yellow fever: 34 in Africa, and 13 in Central and South America. Mass immunization is the most effective way to prevent disease.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[A 29 Mar 2017 report indicates that there have been 37 deaths so far in Espirito Santo state with one registered as the 1st yellow fever death in the capital, Grande Vitoria. While the death occurred in the capital city, the case actually came from an infection acquired in Cariacica, a rural town. Authorities say this was not a case of urban transmission. There have been 281 confirmed yellow fever cases in the state, all from the sylvan (forest) transmission cycle (<http://plus55.com/brazil-culture/2017/03/espirito-santo-first-yellow-fever-death>).Maps of Brazil can be seen at <http://s13.postimg.org/jumnalk87/map_of_Brazil.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>. - Mod.TY]******[2] Vaccine deliveredDate: Fri 31 Mar 2017Source: UN News Centre [edited]<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=56479#.WOA3XxiZMdU>In response to the yellow fever outbreak ongoing in Brazil, some 3.5 million doses of vaccine from the emergency stockpile were deployed to the country through a United Nations-backed coordination mechanism, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).The International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision oversees a continuously replenished emergency stockpile of 6 million doses of yellow fever vaccine. The ICG includes 4 agencies: WHO, the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), and Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF).The Government of Brazil, with the support of the Pan American Health Organization and WHO, is working to ensure protection of its population and preventing further spread of the yellow fever virus, which is transmitted to humans via mosquitoes.Brazil is carrying out yellow fever vaccination campaigns in several states, while strengthening surveillance and case management throughout the country since the outbreak began in January 2017. More than 18.8 million doses of vaccine have been distributed.During 2016, some 30 million doses of yellow fever vaccine from WHO's emergency vaccine stockpile were deployed to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola during the 2016 yellow fever outbreaks in those countries.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is reassuring to learn of the provision of these additional vaccine doses from the WHO stockpile. This should be a significant help in the vaccination campaign currently underway, given the recent spread to new geographic areas in Brazil. Sylvan (forest) cases in monkeys have been detected in 13 states, including the 3 states where human cases have been occurring, raising the question about whether vaccination efforts will be extended to all those areas so far without human cases. The virus is endemic in the sylvan transmission cycle in the Amazon Basin and the Atlantic Forest in Brazil. - Mod.TY]******[3] MonkeysDate: Mon 27 Mar 2017Source: Conservation Suriname [edited]<https://news.mongabay.com/2017/03/yellow-fever-is-killing-howler-monkeys-in-brazil/>The deadly yellow fever -- an infectious disease caused by a mosquito-borne virus -- has spread rapidly throughout Brazil, wiping out populations of the brown howler monkey (_Alouatta guariba_). Thousands of monkeys are believed to have died across the states of Minas Gerais and Espirito Santo in Brazil.One of the worst affected areas is a private, federally protected reserve called RPPN Feliciana Miguel Abdala (RPPN-FMA), located in Caratinga, Minas Gerais. Once home to hundreds of howler monkeys, the forest no longer reverberates with the animals' guttural roars.Karen Strier, a professor of anthropology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and an associate conservation scientist at the Global Wildlife Conservation, has been studying the monkeys of RPPN-FMA since 1983. When she returned to the reserve in January 2017, she found that howler monkeys had disappeared from large parts of the forest.""It was apparent very quickly that the howler monkeys were scarce, because some groups that frequent parts of the forest we would normally see while driving the 2 km [1.24 miles] from the main road into the Reserve and the research house were silent,"" Strier said in an email. ""We had heard about the yellow fever outbreak, so we were paying attention and anxious. But I think it is fair to say that none of us were fully prepared for the silence that we found.""Brown howler monkeys are extremely susceptible to yellow fever, researchers say. An outbreak can even cause local extinctions, especially if the surviving populations of the monkeys are too small to recover. In 2008, for example, an outbreak of yellow fever killed most individuals of a small population of brown howler monkeys in Argentina.The RPPN-FMA reserve could suffer a similar fate. The last census in 2003 estimated about 500 brown howler monkeys in the forest. Now, only a small fraction of these survive, the researchers say. Strier and her colleagues will have a more accurate estimate once they complete their surveys in a few weeks.The speed with which the virus is spreading is very surprising, said Sergio Mendes, a professor of animal biology at the Federal University of Espirito Santo. ""I am very surprised at the speed with which the outbreak is advancing through the landscape and by how the virus can jump from one patch of forest to another, even if they are hundreds of meters apart,"" Mendes said. ""It is also surprising that it is spreading across such a large geographic region.""But the monkeys are most likely not the culprits.""We don't have definitive answers, but we believe that contaminated [infected] mosquitoes can be carried from one forest to another by wind,"" Mendes said. ""Another hypothesis is the role of humans carrying the virus between more distant forests. Most humans are asymptomatic for yellow fever, but may have viruses circulating in their blood for a few days. For example, if people who have been contaminated [infected] travel from one forest to another, they may carry the virus in their blood and, if bitten by a mosquito from the forest, may introduce the virus into a new area. In addition, we can transport contaminated [infected] mosquitoes from one forest to another involuntarily in our cars and luggage.""""It is very important that people understand that the monkeys are not responsible for yellow fever,"" Strier added. ""Many of my colleagues are working hard to make sure this message is communicated to the public.""Researchers like Strier and Mendes are also worried about another species of primate in the reserve: the muriqui (_Brachyteles hypoxanthus_), sometimes referred to as the ""hippie"" monkey for its easygoing lifestyle. Listed as critically endangered on the IUCN Red List, the monkey is one of the most threatened primates in the world. The RPPN-FMS reserve has about 340 northern muriqui, representing [one third] of the species' total population.Fortunately, the muriquis seem less susceptible to yellow fever than the howler monkeys. And with the howler monkeys disappearing from the reserve, the muriquis now occupy a forest devoid of their main competitors.""We don't know what this means yet for the muriquis,"" Strier said. ""It may give them more opportunities if there is more food available to them. Or it may be problematic because the forest could undergo changes without a major seed dispersing species. These are important questions that we are pursuing in new research.""The current outbreak is also being touted as one of Brazil's worst outbreaks among humans in decades. As of March [2017], officials have recorded more than 320 human cases of yellow fever, including 220 deaths, the Washington Post reported. Several additional cases are under investigation.""The most effective way to prevent human deaths due to yellow fever is vaccination,"" Strier said. ""Unfortunately, we don't have a way to vaccinate the nonhuman primates.""[Byline: Shreya Dasgupta]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The massive deaths of brown howler monkeys is bad news indeed. Fortunately, the endangered northern muriqui monkeys do not seem to be affected, and one hopes that this is confirmed in the subsequent studies that are scheduled.Images of the brown howler and the northern muriqui monkeys are accessible at the above URL. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>.]
