MSN [edited]<http://www.msn.com/en-us/health/healthtrending/warning-this-soda-was-just-ruled-poisonous-in-this-country/ar-BBz3L2l>This news will make you think twice about what's in your mixed drink.If you're used to guzzling a bottle or more of Sprite and Fanta, you may want to slow down. Especially after a high court just deemed the drinks as poisonous.According to the BBC, a Lagos High Court in Nigeria ruled that labels should be applied to both Coca-Cola products because they pose a health risk to consumers. Here's exactly where the issue arises: The sodas contain high levels of benzoic acid and yellow ""sunset"" coloring additives that may be harmful when mixed with vitamin C, CNN reports. The US Food and Drug Administration confirms this, noting that the 2 can form a carcinogen called benzene when combined.The 2 drinks were first found problematic 9 years ago, when a local businessman, Dr Emmanuel Fijabi Adebo, and his company tried to export the drinks to the United Kingdom. Health authorities in the UK would not let him sell the products because they exceeded the limit for benzoic acid. Coca-Cola and soda water, however, were not denied.The Nigerian Bottling Company (NBC), which packages the drinks Adebo tried to export, said in their defense that the products were meant for local distribution and consumption, not for export. This spurred anger in many Nigerians as they questioned why food and drink standards were lower in Nigeria than in the UK.In last month's [February 2017] ruling, National Agency For Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC) was fined 2 million naira (USD 6350) for failing to protect Nigerians against harmful consumption of the sodas, and Justice Oyebanji said the following:""The court is in absolute agreement with the learned counsel for the claimants that soft drinks manufactured by Nigeria bottling company ought to be fit for human consumption irrespective of color or creed.""In an interview with the BBC, Adebo agreed, saying, ""We shouldn't have a product that is considered substandard in Europe.""NBC is appealing the court ruling, so no labels have been placed on soda cans or bottles yet. According to the BBC, the NBC said levels of benzoic acid in its Sprite and Fanta are ""well within the levels approved"" by the national regulator and the international food standards body.In a statement to CNN, Coca-Cola's VP for Public Affairs and Communications, Eurasia and Africa, Hamish Banks, said there is no issue with the safety of either drinks. ""The levels of all ingredients in these products, including benzoates and ascorbic acid (vitamin C), are well within the conservative guidelines of the Codex Alimentarius and the Nigeria Industrial Standards.""[Byline: Madison Flager]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Indeed the US Food and Drug Administration (US FDA (<https://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodborneIllnessContaminants/ChemicalContaminants/ucm055815.htm>) did confirm this information in 2007. Most manufacturers reformulated their product to be below the 5 ppb or were below the 5 ppb at the time of testing and data collection. Several products were only 1 ppb or had levels below the limit of detection and were reported as none detected.Benzene is a carcinogen, as mentioned in the article, specifically a leukemogenic (producing leukemia). While 1-5 ppb is a low level, with a carcinogen potential, it may help explain why some people, of any location refuse to drink soft drinks.Clinical signs associated with ingestion of benzene, short term exposure, include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, chest pain, difficulty breathing, irregular heartbeat, headache, drowsiness, symptoms of drunkenness, disorientation, visual disturbances, bluish skin color, lung congestion, lung damage, liver damage, paralysis, convulsions, and coma. However, long term ingestion of benzene has resulted in impotence and cancer.We know nothing about the actual dose these people may be exposed to. We do not know if levels vary between bottles/cans or lot numbers, or how may servings per day an individual drinks per day. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is associated with chronic high-dose benzene exposure, with a latency period of approximately 5-6 years. Although the latency period for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma for chronic, low dose exposure is not established, it appears to be approximately 15-20 years. Consequently if this long latency period is with high levels of benzene then in theory, a low level may push that level out many more years. Benzene has been known as a carcinogen for a number of years.This article is dated in March 2017, but it makes no sense for the product in Nigeria to be higher than regulations unless:- benzene increases in cans that may become slightly warm during transport;- the levels of citric acid were higher and allowed for more combining of the 2 offending agents;- or this article is recycled from a previous much earlier year. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/62>.]
