PAHO/WHO Epidemiological Update Yellow Fever [edited]<http://www2.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=38966&lang=en>Situation summary in the AmericasSince epidemiological week (EW) 1 to EW 13 of 2017, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and Suriname have reported suspected and confirmed yellow fever cases.Following is a summary of the situation in Brazil:In Brazil, since the beginning of the outbreak in December 2016 up to 29 Mar 2017, there were 1987 cases of yellow fever reported (574 confirmed, 926 discarded, and 487 suspected under investigation), including 282 deaths (187 confirmed, 24 discarded, and 71 under investigation). The case fatality rate (CFR) is 33 percent among confirmed cases.According to the probable site of infection, the cases was reported in 330 municipalities, while the confirmed cases were distributed among 101 municipalities in 5 states (EspÌ rito Santo, Minas Gerais, ParÌÁ, Rio de Janeiro, and SÌ£o Paulo). [Footnote: There are also 18 discarded cases that were reported by other Federal Units.]With regard to the confirmed fatal cases and their probable site of infection, 137 were in Minas Gerais, 4 in SÌ£o Paulo, 43 in EspÌ rito Santo, 2 in ParÌÁ, and one in Rio de Janeiro. In descending order, the CFR among suspected and confirmed cases by state is 100 percent in ParÌÁ, 80 percent in SÌ£o Paulo, 32 percent in Minas Gerais, 31 percent in EspÌ rito Santo, and 17 percent in Rio de Janeiro.In the states of Minas Gerais and EspÌ rito Santo, the downward trend in reported cases continues for a 5th consecutive week. In the state of Rio de Janeiro an increasing trend was observed between 9 - 15 Mar [2017]; it will be necessary to observe whether this trend is maintained in the following weeks (Figure 1). In Rio de Janeiro, the 6 confirmed autochthonous cases were reported in the municipality of Casimiro de Abreu, which is located 136 km away from the city of Rio de Janeiro. Moreover, in EW 13, 2 autochthonous cases of yellow fever were confirmed in the state of ParÌÁ, in the municipality of Alenquer. The state of ParÌÁ is within the area considered at risk for yellow fever and, between July 2014 and May 2016, 2 cases were confirmed.To date, _Aedes aegypti_ has not been reported to have a role in transmission. However, confirmed epizootics in large cities, such as Vitoria, EspÌ rito Santo and Salvador, Bahia, represent a high risk for a change in the transmission cycle.Figure 1 [graph available at above URL]. Distribution of reported yellow fever cases by date of symptoms onset and probable state of infection. Brazil, 1 Dec 2016 to 29 Mar 2017.Figure 2 [map available at above URL] illustrates the municipalities with confirmed cases and cases under investigation, as well as confirmed epizootics, and epizootics under investigation.Figure 2 [sic. 3, map available at above URL]. Geographic distribution of reported human yellow fever cases and yellow fever epizootics, Brazil, 31 Jan - 29 Mar 2017.Since the last yellow fever Epidemiological Update up to 29 Mar 2017, 1484 new epizootics were reported in nonhuman primates (NHP). Since the beginning of the outbreak up to 29 Mar 2017, a total of 2712 NHP epizootics were reported, of which 466 were yellow fever confirmed; 896 remain under investigation, and 74 were discarded.Epizootics in NHP were reported in the Federal District and in the states of Alagoas, Amazonas, Bahia, GoiÌÁs, EspÌ rito Santo, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, ParÌÁ, ParaÌ ba, ParanÌÁ, Pernambuco, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, RondÌ«nia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, SÌ£o Paulo, Sergipe, and Tocantins.Reports of epizootics currently under investigation in the states of Amazonas (bordering Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela), Mato Grosso do Sul (bordering Bolivia and Paraguay), ParÌÁ (bordering Guyana and Suriname), ParanÌÁ (bordering Argentina and Paraguay), Rio Grande do Sul (bordering Uruguay and Argentina), RondÌ«nia (bordering Bolivia), Roraima (bordering Guyana and Venezuela), and Santa Catarina (bordering Argentina) represent a risk of spread of the virus to the bordering countries, especially in areas with similar ecosystems.Recommendations:Given the current yellow fever situation in Brazil and the emergence of cases in areas where cases have not been detected in several years, the Pan American Health Organization, Regional Office of the World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) urges Member States to continue efforts to detect, confirm, and adequately and timely treat cases of yellow fever. To this end, health care workers should be kept up-to-date and trained to detect and treat cases, especially in areas of known virus circulation.PAHO/WHO encourages Member States to take the necessary actions to keep travelers heading to areas where yellow fever vaccination is mandatory informed and vaccinated.Vaccination:The most important yellow fever prevention measure is vaccination. Preventive vaccination can be carried out through systematic immunization in childhood or through unique mass campaigns to increase vaccination coverage in risk areas and also through vaccination of those traveling to at-risk areas.The yellow fever vaccine is safe and affordable and provides effective immunity against the disease in the range of 80 to 100 percent of those vaccinated after 10 days and 99 percent immunity after 30 days. A single dose is sufficient to confer immunity and protection for life, without the need for booster doses. Severe side effects are extremely rare.Given the limitations on the availability of vaccines, it is recommended that national authorities conduct an assessment of vaccination coverage against yellow fever in risk areas in order to focus the distribution of vaccines. In addition, it is recommended to keep a stock of vaccines at a national level to respond to possible outbreaks.The vaccine against yellow fever is contraindicated in:- people with acute febrile illnesses, with a commitment to their general health;- people with a history of hypersensitivity to hen's eggs and their derivatives;- pregnant women, except in an emergency situation and following explicit recommendations of the health authorities;- people severely immunocompromised by illness (e.g., cancer, leukemia, AIDS, etc.) or by medicines;- infants younger than 6 months (consult the vaccine laboratory leaflet);- people of any age who have a disease related to the thymus.Precautions:- It is recommended to individually assess the epidemiological risk of contracting disease in the face of the risk of an adverse event occurring in persons over 60 years previously who have not been vaccinated.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The yellow fever outbreak in the 2 most impacted states, Minas Gerais and Espirito Santo, appears to be declining. With the vaccination campaigns underway, one hopes that it is ending there. Fortunately, there are still no reports of _Aedes aegypti_ transmitted virus in an urban human-mosquito-human cycle. The increasing number of reported dead monkeys is a concern for their conservation.There does not appear to be an impending shortage of yellow fever vaccine in Brazil, despite the increased demand due to the current outbreak. According to a 2 Apr 2017 report, the Technological Institute in Immunobiologicals (Bio-Manguinhos/Fiocruz), an organ linked to the Ministry of Health, is the world's largest producer of the vaccine against yellow fever. Bio-Manguinhos is also the main supplier of vaccines of the Ministry of Health, and its production is made from the annual forecast of the National Immunization Program (PNI). According to Agencia Fiocruz, routinely, the monthly production of the yellow fever vaccine in Bio-Manguinhos is 4 million doses. Due to the increase in demand and the prioritization of this input, production currently stands at 6 million doses. The institute, however, has the capacity to produce 9 million doses per month, which represents 108 million per year (<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/yellow-fever-vaccine-brazilian-manufacturer-producing-6-million-doses-per-month-21698/>).A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Brazil can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>. - Mod.TY]
