FAO Animal Health Risk Analysis RVF in Niger [edited]<http://www.fao.org/3/a-i7055e.pdf>SummaryIn the view of the experts participating in this risk assessment, Rift Valley fever (RVF) in Niger currently poses a medium risk (a mean score of 5.75 on a scale of 0 to 10) to human health and a medium-high risk (a mean score of 6.5) to animal health. The experts take the view that RVF is likely/very likely (a 66-99 percent chance range) to occur in Mali during this vector season. Its occurrence in the neighbouring countries of Benin, Burkina Faso and Nigeria is considered less probable, between unlikely (a 10-30% chance) and as likely as not (a 33-66 percent chance).The experts are of the opinion that RVF is unlikely to spread into Algeria, Libya or Morocco in the next 3 to 5 years. Animal movements, trade and changes in weather conditions are the main risk factors in RVF (re)occurring in West Africa and spreading to unaffected areas. Improving human health and the capacities of veterinary services to recognize the clinical signs of RVF in humans and animals are crucial for rapid RVF detection and response. Finally, to prevent human infection, the most feasible measure is to put in place communication campaigns for farmers and the general public.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>[Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a peracute or acute zoonotic disease of domestic ruminants. It is caused by a single serotype of a mosquito-borne virus of the Bunyaviridae family (genus _Phlebovirus_). The disease occurs in climatic conditions favouring the breeding of mosquito vectors and is characterised by abortion, neonatal mortality, and liver damage. The disease is most severe in sheep, goats and cattle. Older, non-pregnant animals, although susceptible to infection, are more resistant to clinical disease. There is considerable variation in the susceptibility to RVF of animals of different species. Camels usually have an inapparent infection with RVF virus (RVFV), but sudden mortality, neonatal mortality, and abortion occur, and abortion rates can be as high as in cattle.Humans are susceptible to RVFV and are infected through contact with infected animal material (body fluids or tissues) or through bites from infected mosquitoes. RVFV has also caused serious infections in laboratory workers and must be handled with biosafety and biocontainment measures. It is recommended that laboratory workers be vaccinated if possible.RVFV is endemic in many African countries and may involve several countries in the region at the same time or progressively expand geographically over the course of a few years. In addition to Africa, large outbreaks have been observed in the Arabian Peninsula and some Indian Ocean Islands. These generally, but not exclusively, follow the periodic cycles of unusually heavy rainfall, which may occur at intervals of several years, or the flooding of wide areas favouring the proliferation of mosquitoes.Rainfall facilitates mosquito eggs to hatch. Aedes mosquitoes acquire the virus from feeding on infected animals and may potentially vertically transmit the virus so that new generations of infected mosquitoes may hatch from their eggs. This provides a potential mechanism for maintaining the virus in nature, as the eggs of these mosquitoes may survive for periods of up to several years in dry conditions. Once livestock is infected, a wide variety of mosquito species may act as the vector for transmission of RVFV and can spread the disease.Low level RVF activity may take place during inter-epizootic periods. RVF should be suspected when exceptional flooding and subsequent abundant mosquito populations are followed by the occurrence of abortions, together with fatal disease marked by necrosis and haemorrhages in the liver that particularly affect newborn lambs, kids and calves, potentially concurrent with the occurrence of an influenza-like illness in farm workers and people handling raw meat.During an outbreak, preventive measures to protect workers from infection should be employed when there are suspicions that RVFV-infected animals or animal products are to be handled.The above and much more information is available at <http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Health_standards/tahm/2.01.18_RVF.pdf>.Subscribers are encouraged to read the full FAO risk analysis document at the source URL. - Mod.ASA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/58>.]
