Concord Monitor [edited]<http://www.concordmonitor.com/doctors-across-the-state-are-seeing-rising-cases-of-hepatitis-C-and-other-infections-8971171>The woman learned she had hepatitis C while locked in a jail cell in Framingham, Mass. When her blood test came back positive, she was convinced her life was over. ""I was basically devastated,"" she said. ""I thought I'd never be able to have children without giving it to my child. I never thought I'd be able to have a normal life with this crazy black cloud hanging over me.""It was the 1st time after a span of drug use that started with prescription narcotics and led to intravenous [IV] heroin use that she had to get a blood test - she had previously avoided trips to the doctor, ashamed to show her track marks. She waited a week before she was able to meet with a counselor, who informed her that there was a cure for Hepatitis C. It took another year and a half to get clean and sober, after which she started the lengthy process of getting treated for Hepatitis C, covered by New Hampshire's Medicaid program. She had to prove to her primary care and gastrointestinal doctor that she was truly on the road to recovery and abstaining from drugs and alcohol in order to even start the expensive cure - a drug called Harvoni, which cost 90 000 USD.Today, she is still in recovery, holding down a steady job and working as a recovery coach on the Seacoast. She is also cured of hepatitis C. ""The state of New Hampshire paid for that for me, and I'm very grateful for that,"" she said. She calls it one of the many ""little gifts that recovery has given me.""Drug overdose deaths are the most obvious signs of New Hampshire's opioid epidemic, but an additional public health crisis is looming. Doctors across the state say they are seeing more and more patients with serious infections such as hepatitis C, [HIV] and bacterial endocarditis, caused by intravenous drug use, most commonly through shared needles.It's difficult to get a handle on the number of Hepatitis C cases in New Hampshire. Individual providers across the state started to report cases to the state's Department of Health and Human Services late in 2016, but there's not enough data to release yet, state officials said. Furthermore, because individual providers are tasked with reporting, most hospitals don't keep in-house numbers. At a recent state Senate hearing on a bill to set up a needle exchange program, one epidemiologist who studies infectious disease from IV drug use compared the Granite State's Hepatitis C problem with that of Tijuana, Mexico.At a suboxone program at Franklin Regional Hospital, Dr. Paul Racicot estimates that about 50 percent of his patients are positive for Hepatitis C. ""What astonished us was the rate, period,"" Racicot said. ""I didn't expect a Hep C rate over 50 percent."" Almost all of his patients contract the disease from sharing needles to inject drugs, he said.If hepatitis C is left untreated, it's a serious disease that [can] eventually cause serious liver damage. The good news is there is a cure for the disease. The bad news is how expensive it is: treatment can run from about 65 000 to 100 000 USD.Racicot figures that if 100 of his patients have hepatitis C and need to be treated at a cost of 100 000 USD per patient, that's 10 million USD ""to treat a preventable disease."" ""It is a public policy problem because someone's going to have to pay,"" Racicot said. ""That's just us. We're just one small little catchment area in New Hampshire.""Out of 12 New Hampshire hospitals the Monitor contacted, Catholic Medical Center in Manchester is the only 1 with a complete data set of hepatitis C cases over the past 3 years. The hospital tracks cases related to IV drug use, as well as the ones that are not. From 2014 to 2016, CMC saw the number of hepatitis C cases in patients who were drug users rise from 157 to 289. At the same time, the numbers of hepatitis C cases in patients who were not drug users fell from 1035 to 807.The hospital's Chief Medical Officer Dr. William Goodman is quick to say the data aren't perfect but they show a distinct trend - among drug users, hepatitis C cases have nearly doubled. ""They're rising pretty substantially,"" he said.Portsmouth Regional Hospital also provided the Monitor with numbers of hepatitis C cases it's seen over the past few years; however, the hospital does not separate out drug-related and non-drug-related cases. In 2014, the Portsmouth hospital had 53 cases, which went up to 65 in 2015 and 87 in 2016. A total of 15 more cases have been identified in the first 3 months of 2017.At Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center's Perinatal Addiction program for pregnant and postpartum women in Lebanon, 29 percent of patients screened from 2014 to 2016 tested positive for the hepatitis C antibody; of those, 52 percent had active disease.""That's just an astounding number,"" said Dr. Bryan Marsh, chief of infectious disease at Dartmouth-Hitchcock. ""Those who have a history of injection drug use have a very, very high prevalence of Hepatitis C. In some communities in the region, it's scarily high.""Many health professionals say the reason numbers are rising is the proliferation of dirty needles in New Hampshire. The state is the only one in New England without a needle exchange [program]; health and addiction experts recently testified at a Senate hearing that users are injecting with dirty needles because there are few clean ones available. A bill that would establish a needle exchange recently passed the state Senate and now will be voted on by members of the House.[Byline: Ella Nilsen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[In the absence of a vaccine, infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/231>.]
