NBC San Diego [edited]<http://www.nbcsandiego.com/news/local/2-Hepatitis-Deaths-Reported-Virus-on-the-Rise-in-San-Diego-418660883.html>A total of 2 people in San Diego have died from hepatitis A and 36 people have been hospitalized from the disease, according to the County Health and Human Services Agency (CHHSA). Up to 29 of those cases have a history of substance abuse and 27 are homeless. Five people became ill with hepatitis A after traveling outside the United States. No common sources of infection have been identified and investigations are still ongoing.""The County is working closely with the local health community to increase outreach to vulnerable populations to raise awareness and promote hepatitis A vaccination,"" said Wilma Wooten, M.D., M.P.H., County public health officer. ""Those at risk are urged to talk to their health care providers and get vaccinated for hepatitis A.""Hepatitis A is a vaccine-preventable disease. The CHHSA says that the vaccine is recommended as part of the routine childhood vaccination schedule, but most adults have not been vaccinated and may be susceptible to the hepatitis A virus. Dr Sayone Thihalolipavan, County deputy public health officer, said that people don't hear too much about hepatitis A nowadays thanks to the help of the vaccine.Thihalolipavan also added that from 2011-2015, there were 15 to 40 cases of hepatitis A per year, according to Health and Human Services data. ""Given that the current outbreak already has 42 hepatitis A cases, we are actively working with the medical community to address this,"" said Thihalolipavan.Risk factors for hepatitis A infection include living with or having sexual contact with someone who has the virus, or sharing injection or non-injection illegal drugs with someone who is infected. The hepatitis A virus can also be transmitted through contaminated food or water.The CHHSA recommends that all children receive the 1st dose of vaccine between 12 months and 23 months of age, and the 2nd dose 6 to 18 months later.If you are planning an international trip, you should check the CDC Travelers' Health website to see if a hepatitis A vaccination is recommended before going to your intended destinations.[Byline: Rachael Guerra]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is possible that the large number of hospitalizations relates to the fact that those infected are homeless as a great majority of hepatitis A infections do not require in-hospital care. Excluding the cases acquired outside of the USA, all of the cases have a history of substance abuse although it is not stated if it was injection drug use and it is not stated if the infected individuals were co-infected with either hepatitis B or C. Hepatitis A can also be transmitted by the bloodborne route as there is a silent period of viremia that occurs during the incubation period.Deaths related to HAV infection are associated with acute fulminant infection which occurs in perhaps 1 per 1000 cases. For 2 deaths to be recorded, are there other co-morbidities such as chronic liver disease or co-infection with HBV or HCV? Given that public health officials are reporting this, this is likely to be cases of acute HAV documented by the presence of IgM anti-HAV antibodies. ProMED would appreciate more information about this relatively (for the USA) large cluster. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
