Hawaii News Now [edited]<http://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/story/35093094/children-test-positive-for-lead-in-kalihi-neighborhood>At least 2 children have tested positive for lead poisoning in a Kalihi neighborhood where state officials are still scrambling to fix a toxic waste dump, Hawaii News Now has learned.The mother of the children, who asked that we not reveal her identity, says her daughter and nephew were diagnosed with lead poisoning last spring [2016]. Both children are toddlers who live in a home on Factory Street, where a layer of lead is buried beneath crumbling asphalt in some areas.Her family was caught off guard by the test results.""When I went to the doctor, she said my daughter had a '6.' A number 6 for lead poisoning. My nephew had a '10,'"" the mother said.""Those levels suggest there might have been some exposure,"" says Dr Josh Green, an emergency room physician who says a long term build up of lead can cause severe developmental problems.""Up to 5, it tends to be a non-issue. Five to 10, you're watching it. If it gets over 10, you start to get serious about it,"" said Dr. Green.At first, the mother says, she thought toys were the source of the lead. She didn't know about the soil contamination until she saw Hawaii News Now's exclusive report on television.""They play outside. They play with the rocks,"" said the mother.When we asked health department officials about the risk to residents last month [March 2017], they didn't mention anyone who had tested positive for lead, even though the family's exposure had been reported to the department.Fenix Grange is a program manager for the Department of Health's Hazard Evaluation Emergency Response Office. On [Mon 13 Mar 2017], she told Hawaii News Now that the department didn't ""see a risk right now, but wanted to work with the city and county to make sure we can keep this area covered.""On Thursday, the department said the blood lead levels reported by the children's' doctor weren't high enough for them to get involved. With the history of the neighborhood, it's an attitude that troubles some lawmakers. [Under the CDC guidelines these levels are high enough for treatment. - Mod.TG]""I really think it seems suspect, but what it does create is a level of mistrust. Every time they're coming out with information, you have to question whether they're being forthright or not, and that is a concern,"" said City Councilman Joey Manahan.Both children have since fully recovered from the incident, and the city is taking steps to fix the problem.After our report, the health department workers hand delivered a letter officially notifying residents about the problem. Department officials tell us there are other areas in Kakaako and Iwilei that are contaminated with lead. Despite repeated requests, officials still haven't told us exactly where they are.[Byline: Allyson Blair]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Until 2012, children were identified as having a blood lead ""level of concern"" if the test result is 10 or more micrograms per deciliter of lead in blood. CDC is no longer using the term ""level of concern"" and is instead using the reference value to identify children who have been exposed to lead and who require case management.Hence, the single numbers referenced in this article are likely referring to 6 or 10 micrograms of per deciliter of lead in the blood.In 2012 the CDC changed their blood lead level recommendations.Experts now use a reference level of 5 micrograms per deciliter to identify children with blood lead levels that are much higher than most children's levels. This new level is based on the U.S. population of children ages 1-5 years who are in the highest 2.5 percent of children when tested for lead in their blood.This article does not tell us the ages of these children. But it is nevertheless concerning they tested at 6 and 10 which may indicate they should have been treated.In the past, blood lead level tests below 10 micrograms per deciliter of lead in blood may, or may not, have been reported to parents. The new lower value means that more children will likely be identified as having lead exposure allowing parents, doctors, public health officials, and communities to take action earlier to reduce the child's future exposure to lead.The new recommendation does not change the guidance that chelation therapy be considered when a child has a blood lead test result greater than or equal to 45 micrograms per deciliter.The article states the children have recovered. It is unclear if they received chelation therapy.The article indicates that workers hand delivered notices to the residents. This makes me suspicious there is more than one resident involved and likely more than one area affected by this situation. It almost makes me think the neighborhoods may be built on some kind of area where lead waste of some nature was dumped, covered and built upon over the course of many years.Hopefully the area will have both adults and children tested for lead. Likewise, it may be appropriate to test the water and determine if the lead is coming from lead pipes or some other source.For more information regarding symptoms of lead poisoning readers are referred to the moderator comments on ProMED-mail posting Lead poisoning - USA (NC) 20161228.4729158.Portions of this comment were extracted from: <https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/acclpp/blood_lead_levels.htm>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/59574>.]
