WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Update number 286 (based on data up to 19 Mar 2017)---------------------------------------------------Summary-------Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere continued to decrease. Worldwide, influenza A(H3N2) and influenza B viruses were predominant during this reporting period. In South Asia, influenza activity with mainly influenza A(H1N1) remained elevated.- In North America, overall influenza activity continued to decrease in Canada and United States of America, with influenza A(H3N2) virus predominating. In Mexico, influenza activity decreased slightly, but remained high, with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus predominating.- In Europe, influenza activity continued to decrease to low levels in general, but especially in South Western Europe. In Northern Europe, some countries reported continued influenza activity, with influenza A (H3N2) and influenza B viruses. In some countries in Eastern Europe, influenza activity decreased but the proportion of influenza B virus detection increased in recent weeks.- In East Asia, low influenza activity was reported with influenza A(H3N2) virus predominant in the region.- In Western Asia, influenza activity continued to decrease with influenza B virus predominant in the region. In Armenia and Georgia, high levels of severe acute respiratory infection were reported in the recent weeks.- In Southern Asia, influenza activity continued to be reported in India, Maldives and Sri Lanka, with mainly influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus reported followed by influenza B virus.- In South East Asia, influenza activity remained low.- In Northern Africa, low influenza activity was reported in Morocco and Tunisia, with influenza A(H3N2) and influenza B viruses circulating in the region.- In East and West Africa, low influenza activity was reported in the recent weeks, with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09, influenza A(H3N2) and influenza B viruses co-circulating.- In the Caribbean and Central America countries, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained low in general.- In tropical South America, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained low, although RSV [respiratory syncytial virus] activity remained elevated in Colombia.- In the temperate zone of the Southern Hemisphere, influenza activity was at inter-seasonal levels.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 98 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 6 Mar 2017 to 19 Mar 2017 (data as of 31 Mar 2017 08:43:43 UTC).The WHO GISRS [Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System] laboratories tested more than 132 143 specimens during that time period. 23 560 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 15 164 (64.4 percent) were typed as influenza A and 8396 (35.6 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 755 (15.1 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 4247 (84.9 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 588 (77 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 176 (23 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Overall, in most of northern hemisphere, influenza activity decreased or remained low. However, RSV activity was reportedly increased elevated in Colombia. No novel influenza viruses were reported. - Mod.UBA]
