Sky News [edited]<http://news.sky.com/story/great-barrier-reef-bleaching-outbreak-damages-two-thirds-of-site-10832492>Record-breaking temperatures driven by global warming have bleached two thirds of the Great Barrier Reef, scientists say. Aerial surveys show a 900 mile [around 1450 km] stretch of the Australian reef is badly bleached -- which occurs when stressed corals lose algae and turn white. Bleached corals can recover if the temperature drops and algae repopulates, but researchers say global warming threatens to make the problem irreversible.It is feared large swathes of the World Heritage-listed area may not recover from the latest outbreak, which follows a severe instance in 2016 and is the 4th mass bleaching since 1998. Dr James Kerry, who led the aerial surveys, said: ""Bleached corals are not necessarily dead corals, but in the severe central region we anticipate high levels of coral loss. It takes at least a decade for a full recovery of even the fastest growing corals, so mass bleaching events 12 months apart offers zero prospect of recovery for reefs that were damaged in 2016.""In recent years, farm pollution, development, and an outbreak of the coral-eating crown-of-thorns starfish has worsened conditions in the Great Barrier Reef. Meanwhile, several reefs around Queensland's Whitsunday Islands were destroyed or badly damaged by a category 4 cyclone last month [March 2017]. Authorities which opened a review into the damage have found pulverised coral at popular snorkelling spots.Professor Terry Hughes, director of the institute which carried out the aerial studies, said: ""Clearly the reef is struggling with multiple impacts. Without a doubt the most pressing of these is global warming. As temperatures continue to rise the corals will experience more and more of these events."" He added: ""Ultimately, we need to cut carbon emissions, and the window to do so is rapidly closing.""--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Coral diseases may have multiple interacting causes. Coral reefs worldwide are threatened by increasing anthropogenic stressors, particularly the problems associated with global climate change. Coral disease is recognized as another problem causing the degradation of reefs, which is demonstrated by a global increase in the numbers of coral diseases, coral species affected, and disease outbreaks.Bleaching of corals has been shown to be associated with warming oceans. Rising of sea surface temperature and CO2 increase has produced large-scale disintegration of the critically important coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis, resulting in severe coral bleaching events. - Mod.PMBA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/4336>.]
