PAHO/WHO Epidemiological Update Yellow Fever [edited]<http://www2.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=39198&lang=en>Situation summary in the Americas---------------------------------Since epidemiological week (EW) 1 to EW 14 of 2017 [1 Jan-6 Apr 2017], Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and Suriname have reported suspected and confirmed yellow fever cases.The following is a summary of the situation in Brazil.In Brazil, since the beginning of the outbreak in December 2016 up to 6 Apr 2017, there were 2210 cases of yellow fever reported (604 confirmed, 1054 discarded, and 552 suspected under investigation), including 302 deaths (202 confirmed, 52 discarded, and 48 under investigation). The case fatality rate (CFR) is 33 per cent among confirmed cases.According to the probable site of infection, the cases were reported in 342 municipalities, while the confirmed cases were distributed among 103 municipalities in 5 states (EspÌ rito Santo, Minas Gerais, ParÌÁ, Rio de Janeiro, and SÌ£o Paulo).With regard to the confirmed fatal cases and their probable site of infection, 148 were in Minas Gerais, 4 in SÌ£o Paulo, 43 in EspÌ rito Santo, 4 in ParÌÁ, and 3 in Rio de Janeiro. In descending order, the CFR among suspected and confirmed cases by state is 100 per cent in ParÌÁ, 80 per cent in SÌ£o Paulo, 34 per cent in Minas Gerais, 29 per cent in EspÌ rito Santo, and 27 per cent in Rio de Janeiro.In the state of Minas Gerais, the downward trend in reported cases persists. The date of symptom onset of the last reported case is 6 Mar 2017. In the state of EspÌ rito Santo, since EW 9 of 2017 [week ending 4 Mar 2017], a new increase has been observed in the number of cases, most of which are being reported from the southern part of the state. Local and state authorities are investigating and characterizing this increase in cases while also intensifying immunization activities. Similarly, in the state of Rio de Janeiro, an increase in the number of suspected cases was observed between 15-25 Mar [2017]; it will be necessary to observe if this trend is maintained in the following weeks (figure 1 [see below]).Moreover, since EW 13 [week ending 1 Apr 2017], 4 autochthonous cases of yellow fever were confirmed in the state of ParÌÁ, in the municipalities of Alenquer (3 cases) and Monte Alegre (1).To date, _Aedes aegypti_ has not been reported to have a role in transmission. However, confirmed epizootics in large cities, such as Vitoria in EspÌ rito Santo and Salvador in Bahia, represent a high risk for a change in the transmission cycle.A recent study conducted by researchers from Brazil reported that the genomic sequencing of samples obtained from 2 southern brown howler monkeys (_Alouatta guariba clamitans_) found in the state of EspÌ rito Santo belong to the South American genotype I. This genotype has been the most frequently found in Brazil during previous outbreaks.Figure 1 [graph, available at the source URL above]. Distribution of reported yellow fever cases by date of symptoms onset and probable state of infection. Brazil, 1 Dec 2016-13 Apr 2017.Figure 2 [available at the source URL above] illustrates the municipalities with confirmed cases and cases under investigation, as well as confirmed epizootics, and epizootics under investigation. Figure 2 [maps]. Geographic distribution of reported human yellow fever cases and yellow fever epizootics, 31 Jan-2 Mar and 6 Apr 2017.Since the beginning of the outbreak up to 6 Apr 2017, a total of 2871 nonhuman primates (NHP) epizootics were reported, of which 474 were yellow fever confirmed, 997 remain under investigation, and 77 were discarded. Between the release by Brazil of bulletins nos. 34 and 35 concerning yellow fever, an additional 159 epizootics in NHP were added, with the majority of them occurring between January-April of 2017 and being entered into the register system retrospectively.Epizootics in NHP were reported in the Federal District and in the states of Alagoas, Amazonas, Bahia, GoiÌÁs, EspÌ rito Santo, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, ParÌÁ, ParaÌ ba, ParanÌÁ, Pernambuco, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, RondÌ«nia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, SÌ£o Paulo, Sergipe, and Tocantins.Reports of epizootics currently under investigation in states bordering Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela represent a risk of spread of the virus to the bordering countries, especially in areas with similar ecosystems.Recommendations---------------Given the current yellow fever situation in Brazil and the emergence of cases in areas where cases have not been detected in several years, the Pan American Health Organization, Regional Office of the World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) urges member states to continue efforts to detect, confirm, and adequately and timely treat cases of yellow fever. To this end, health care workers should be kept up to date and trained to detect and treat cases especially in areas of known virus circulation.PAHO/WHO encourages member states to take the necessary actions to keep travelers, heading to areas where yellow fever vaccination is mandatory, informed and vaccinated.Vaccination-----------The most important yellow fever prevention measure is vaccination. Preventive vaccination can be carried out through systematic immunization in childhood or through unique mass campaigns to increase vaccination coverage in risk areas and also through vaccination of those traveling to at-risk areas.The yellow fever vaccine is safe and affordable and provides effective immunity against the disease in the range of 80 to 100 per cent of those vaccinated after 10 days and 99 per cent immunity after 30 days. A single dose is sufficient to confer immunity and protection for life, without the need for booster doses. Severe side effects are extremely rare.Given the limitations on the availability of vaccines, it is recommended that national authorities conduct an assessment of vaccination coverage against yellow fever in risk areas in order to focus the distribution of vaccines. In addition, it is recommended to keep a stock of vaccines at a national level to respond to possible outbreaks.The vaccine against yellow fever is contraindicated in:- people with acute febrile illnesses, with a commitment to their general health;- people with a history of hypersensitivity to hen's eggs and their derivatives;- pregnant women, except in an emergency situation and following explicit recommendations of the health authorities;- people severely immunocompromised by illness (such as cancer, leukemia, AIDS, etc) or by medicines;- infants younger than 6 months (consult the vaccine laboratory leaflet);- people of any age who have a disease related to the thymus.Precautions-----------It is recommended to individually assess the epidemiological risk of contracting disease in the face of the risk of an adverse event occurring in persons over 60 years previously who have not been vaccinated.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp[Although the number of cases continues to decline, the geographic area of human cases has expanded recently to Rio de Janeiro, SÌ£o Paulo, and ParÌÁ states. So far, the yellow fever vaccine supply appears to be adequate to provide coverage in the affected states. Nothing can be done to halt the infection of non-human primates in the affected areas.Maps of Brazil can be accessed at <http://s13.postimg.org/jumnalk87/map_of_Brazil.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>. - Mod.TY]******[2] Brazil (SÌ£o Paulo state)Date: Mon 10 Apr 2017Source: Plus 55 [edited]<http://plus55.com/brazil-culture/2017/04/sao-paulo-death-sylvatic-yellow-fever>On [Sat 8 Apr 2017], another man died from the sylvatic yellow fever virus in SÌ£o Paulo. The state has registered 9 deaths thus far. Of the 9 cases, 4 contracted the virus within the state of SÌ£o Paulo while the other 5 contracted the disease in Minas Gerais.There are an additional 25 people receiving treatment for the disease. Of this group, 17 may have contracted the disease in the rural municipality where they live.The Health Secretariat is directing the vaccine to high-risk areas, or people who will travel to them. The vaccine is also for pregnant women, breast-feeding women, chemotherapy or radiotherapy patients.Sylvatic virus--------------Brazil registered its 1st confirmed cases of sylvatic yellow fever in January [2017]. The sylvatic strain of the virus concentrates mostly in rural areas, and transmits via mosquitos from monkey to man. Meanwhile, the urban strain transmits from man to man and adapts easily to city environments. The same _Aedes aegypti_ mosquito responsible for dengue and Zika also transmits yellow fever. Although the urban strain has caused outbreaks across Africa, Brazil hasn't had a case of urban yellow fever since 1942.Yellow fever lasts only a short time. Symptoms include the chills, nausea, back pain, loss of appetite, and headaches.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The situation in SÌ£o Paulo needs to be watched carefully. Although the number of human yellow fever cases in the state is small, it has been increasing. Increased surveillance and proactive vaccination are essential under this circumstance.ProMED-mail subscriber Dr Stephen Seligman (<sseligman@mail.rockefeller.edu>) communicated with ProMED-mail. Acknowledging that mosquitoes in the genera _Haemagogus_ and _Sabethes_ are the vectors in the classical sylvan (forest) transmission cycle, he asks if people are tracking and identifying mosquitoes and even better checking them for yellow fever virus, including _Aedes aegypti_, the urban vector.The reports coming to ProMED-mail thus far indicate that epidemiological teams are active in the areas where cases occur, and that presumably includes vector surveillance. However, specific details of vector surveillance and testing have not been received. - Mod.TY]
