ABC (Australian Broadcasting Corporation) News [edited]<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-04-09/melioidosis-nt-darwin-housing-potentially-deadly-bacterium/8413094>More people are being infected by a potentially fatal bacterium in the Northern Territory [NT], and health experts suspect building works could have something to do with the rise in cases. It infects a person through open cuts and wounds, and it can be inhaled.One man breathed in the bacterium in December 2016, while he was living behind a block of flats in Darwin [Northern Territory] that were being demolished. ""There was a lot of dust coming over the fences, onto the car. They say I got it airborne,"" he said. The 57 year old went to a GP twice with flu-like symptoms, but the bacterium was not detected. He lost 20 kg [44 lb] in one month, was unable to make decisions, and it wasn't until his partner and best friend organized for police and ambulance to intervene that he got seen to in a hospital. ""I just felt so tired, had no energy. It was bad enough just going to the toilet and back or have a shower,"" he said.The average number of people getting the bacterium has surged to the highest it has been since record keeping began in 1990. The yearly average of cases in the NT is 60, compared with 27 between 1990 and 2010. ""We attribute our increasing cases in part to the quite significant expansion of the suburbs of Darwin, with a lot of construction going on over the last 10 years of new suburbs,"" said infectious diseases expert Professor Bart Currie from Royal Darwin Hospital.So far in 2017, there have been 39 cases of melioidosis in the NT, and 5 deaths. ""One of the factors related to potentially a lower number of cases in 2017 than we predicted is that the building works have dropped off substantially in the last year or so,"" Professor Currie said.Heavy drinkers to be aware of their increased risk of the effects of melioidosis. Also vulnerable are people with suppressed immune systems, including cancer patients and people with kidney disease.The bacterium has long been associated with gardening, but researchers are finding links in unusual circumstances, like high-pressure hosing, which can spray contaminated soil and water into the air, which people then inhale, Professor Currie said. He said people should always wear a mask when spraying dirt away.Health professionals say a preventative therapy that targets dialysis patients is showing promising results. Throughout the year, the preventative antimicrobial drug ""Bactrim"" [trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole; cotrimoxazole; septrin] is given to dialysis patients 3 times a week, to prevent the onset of melioidosis; the therapy started during the 2014 wet season and is preventing patients from contracting the disease. ""We had a lot of kidney patients, particularly dialysis patients admitted in hospital with very severe melioidosis, and we had very high complications including high mortality,"" said Dr William Majoni, a kidney disease specialist at RDH [Royal Darwin Hospital].""We are actually quite impressed by the way the antibiotic has worked."" Dr Jaqui Hughes is a kidney specialist and researcher at Menzies School of Health Research and has developed videos that raise awareness about avoiding melioidosis for people needing hemodialysis. ""There are really simple ways: It's about protecting your skin from getting a cut or a sore from where the bacterium can get inside your body, covering up properly to do that, and even being out of the blowing sideways wind where bacteria can travel,"" she said.[byline: Eleni Roussos]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Melioidosis is a disease of the rainy season in its endemic areas. It mainly affects people who have direct contact with soil and water. Many have an underlying predisposing condition such as diabetes (commonest risk factor), renal disease, cirrhosis, thalassemia, alcohol dependence, immunosuppressive therapy, chronic obstructive lung disease, cystic fibrosis, and excess kava consumption. Kava is an herbal member of the pepper family that can be associated with chronic liver disease.Melioidosis may present at any age, but peaks in the 4th and 5th decades of life, affecting men more than women. In addition, although severe fulminating infection can and does occur in healthy individuals, severe disease and fatalities are much less common in those without risk factors.The most commonly recognized presentation of melioidosis is pneumonia, associated with high fever, significant muscle aches, chest pain, and -- although the cough can be nonproductive -- respiratory secretions can be purulent, significant in quantity, and associated with on-and-off bright, red blood. The lung infection can be rapidly fatal -- with bacteremia and shock -- or somewhat more indolent.Acute melioidosis septicemia is the most severe complication of the infection. It presents as a typical sepsis syndrome with hypotension, high cardiac output, and low systemic vascular resistance. In many cases, a primary focus in the soft tissues or lung can be found. The syndrome, usually in patients with risk factor comorbidities, is characteristically associated with multiple abscesses involving the cutaneous tissues, the lung, the liver, and spleen, and a very high mortality rate of 80 to 95 per cent. With prompt optimal therapy, the case fatality rate can be decreased to 40 to 50 per cent.The melioidosis bacillus is intrinsically insensitive to many antimicrobials. It should be noted that bioterrorism strains may be engineered to be even more resistant. _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ is usually inhibited by tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (SXT), antipseudomonal penicillins, carbapenems, ceftazidime, and amoxicillin/clavulanate or ampicillin/sulbactam. Ceftriaxone and cefotaxime have good in vitro activity but poor efficacy; and cefepime did not appear, as well, to be equivalent to ceftazidime in a mouse model. The unusual antimicrobial profile of resistance to colistin and polymyxin B and the aminoglycosides but sensitivity to amoxicillin/clavulanate is a useful tool to consider in treatment of infection with the organism.The randomized and quasi-randomized trials comparing melioidosis treatment have been reviewed, and it was found that the formerly standard therapy of chloramphenicol, doxycycline, and SXT combination had a higher mortality rate than therapy with ceftazidime, imipenem/cilastatin, or amoxicillin/clavulanate (or ampicillin/sulbactam). The betalactam-betalactamase inhibitor therapy, however, seemed to have a higher failure rate.Source: Tolaney P, Lutwick LI: Melioidosis. In: Lutwick LI, Lutwick SM (eds). Bioterror: the weaponization of infectious diseases. Totowa NJ: Humana Press, 2008 pp 145-58.For the microbiologists among our readers, a new (and 5th) member of the _B. pseudomallei_ complex has been described, _B. humptydooensis_ , from the Northern Territory of Australia and named after the small town of Humpty Doo near to where the isolate was found (Tuanyok A, Mayo M, Scholz H, et al: _Burkholderia humptydooensis_ sp. nov., a new species related to _Burkholderia thailandensis_ and the fifth member of the _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ complex. App Environ Microbiol 2017; 83(5): e02802-16; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5311406/>.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/292>.]
