Eurosurveillance 22(14) [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22764>Blood donor screening for West Nile virus (WNV) revealed acute Usutu virus (USUV) infection, Germany----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Cadar D, Maier P, MÌ ller S, et alAbstract--------Between 1 Jun-31 Dec 2016, 13 023 blood donations from the University Hospital Aachen in [North Rhine-Westphalia] Germany were routinely screened for West Nile virus (WNV) RNA using the cobas TaqScreen WNV Test. On 28 September 2016, one blood donor was tested positive. Subsequent analysis revealed an acute Usutu virus (USUV) infection. During the ongoing USUV epizootics in Germany, blood transfusion services, public health authorities and clinicians should be aware of increased human USUV infections.[Introduction]--------------During July-October 2016, several western European countries reported the largest Usutu virus (USUV) epizootic registered so far in Europe causing a massive bird die-off. Blood donor samples collected between 1 Jun-31 Dec 2016 in the Institute for Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital, Aachen, are routinely screened for West Nile virus (WNV) RNA. On 17 Nov 2016, the World Health Organization Collaborating Centre (WHO CC) for Arbovirus and Haemorrhagic Fever Reference and Research in Hamburg was informed about a suspected WNV infection in a blood donor from Aachen. Although the sample was tested positive for the presence of WNV RNA, subsequent sequencing and serological investigations revealed an acute USUV infection of the donor. Here we report the 1st detection of an acute USUV infection of a blood donor from Germany using a cross-reactive WNV screening test and further successful sequencing of a large portion of the genome using deep-sequencing technology.Background----------USUV, an Old World flavivirus included in the JEV antigenic complex is transmitted by mosquitoes to birds that act as the main amplifying hosts, while humans are considered incidental or dead-end hosts. Since the 1st emergence in the mid-1990s in Europe, USUV has been responsible for smaller periodic epizootics in several European countries, the largest one being registered in 2016. USUV can cause Usutu fever in humans with mild to severe symptoms characterised by fever, rash, jaundice, headache, nuchal rigidity, hand tremor, and hyperreflexia. So far, humans were considered incidental hosts with very low prevalence, but recent data from Italy indicated that human USUV infection may not be a sporadic event and is more frequent than WNV infections. In 2012, 1 of 4200 blood donors from south-west Germany was tested positive for USUV-specific IgG and IgM antibodies demonstrating a recent USUV infection of the donor. However, there is no documented case of Usutu fever caused by transfusion of USUV-contaminated blood products.Discussion and conclusion-------------------------The present report, including serological and molecular findings, suggests an acute and asymptomatic USUV infection of a blood donor in Germany in late summer of 2016. The Bayesian phylogenetic analysis revealed that the USUV sequence of the blood donor had a high sequence homology with recent strains responsible for the 2016 USUV epizootics in the western part of Germany from where the donor lived. Since the blood donor had no history of travelling abroad in the 7 months before the end of September 2016, she must have been infected in Germany, which, together with the genetic data obtained, further strengthens an autochthonous USUV infection in the Aachen region.Recent molecular and serologic surveillance studies in Germany and neighbouring countries identified epizootic hotspots for USUV that could help to initiate targeted vector control programs to prevent human exposure to the virus. Moreover, the present report highlights the potential risk of transfusion-associated transmission of USUV. However, until now there is no reported case of transfusion-associated Usutu fever in Europe. The demonstrated case should raise awareness of the risk of USUV infection in humans during epizootics, especially in late summer.--Communicated by:Roland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[It will be interesting to see if Usutu virus (USUV) has become endemic as it spreads across northern Europe with the risk of new cases when the transmission season begins in warmer months. Although there have been no cases of transfusion-related Usutu virus transmission to date, the future potential for that to occur is real. One hopes that testing of blood products and surveillance of mosquito vectors and dead birds for the presence of USUV will continue in 2017.There are interesting figures in this report and ProMED-mail readers are urged to see them and the full text at the URL above.A Health Map/ProMED-mail map of northern Europe showing the location of Germany can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9921>. - Mod.TY]
