New England Journal of Medicine [edited]<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc1701600>[ref: Simon-Loriere E, Faye O, Prot M, et al: Autochthonous Japanese encephalitis with yellow fever coinfection in Africa. N Engl J Med 2017; 376(15): 1483-5; doi 10.1056/NEJMc1701600]----------------------------------------------------------------------Correspondence--------------Japanese encephalitis virus and yellow fever virus are mosquito-borne flaviviruses that circulate in disjunct geographic areas with different mosquito vectors. Japanese encephalitis is endemic to most of Asia and the Western Pacific, whereas yellow fever occurs in tropical areas of Africa and South America. Both viruses lead to a wide spectrum of disease severities that include asymptomatic infection and mild illness with influenza-like symptoms. However, severe yellow fever disease can be fatal in 20 to 60 percent of cases, whereas symptomatic Japanese encephalitis virus can progress to severe encephalitis, with case fatality rates of up to 30 percent. Survivors often have long-term neuropsychological sequelae.In March 2016, during the yellow fever outbreak in Angola, a 19-year-old man was admitted to the Cunene Provincial Hospital with a 5-day history of fever, headache, and jaundice. The patient, who survived, worked in the capital city of Luanda at the onset of disease and had not traveled abroad. A blood sample was obtained, and a test for yellow fever virus was positive. The sample was later processed for high-throughput RNA sequencing. Because the protocol followed made use of randomly primed cDNA synthesis, it provided a comprehensive and quantitative view of all RNA present in the sample, thus enabling the characterization of potential coinfecting viruses.Surprisingly, de novo assembly of the sample reads revealed a Japanese encephalitis virus genome (GenBank accession number, KX945367) in addition to the expected yellow fever virus genome (GenBank accession number, KX982182). Phylogenetic analysis revealed that this Japanese encephalitis virus variant belongs to genotype III, clustering closely with variants sampled in Asia (Fig. 1A, and the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this letter [at the source URL above]). The yellow fever virus sequence was closely related to both a sequence from the 1971 yellow fever virus outbreak in Angola and the recently reported yellow fever virus sequence detected in a sample from a Chinese traveler returning from Angola (Fig. 1B [available at the source URL above]).The likelihood of sample contamination is small, since neither the Institut Pasteur of Dakar, Senegal, where the RNA extracted from the samples in Angola was delivered, nor the laboratory at the Institut Pasteur, Paris, where the libraries were constructed and sequenced, has ever had any material containing Japanese encephalitis virus. In addition, none of the 15 additional RNA samples from patients with yellow fever virus who were treated at the same time provided sequence reads that corresponded to Japanese encephalitis virus. Leftover sera from the Angola samples were later extracted at Institut Pasteur of Dakar, and only sample C17 was positive for Japanese encephalitis virus RT-qPCR.We found evidence of locally acquired infection with Japanese encephalitis virus in Africa in addition to coinfection with yellow fever virus, which raises the issue of the risk of circulation of the Japanese encephalitis virus and human infection in Africa. Since both the vectors and suitable hosts (e.g., pigs) for Japanese encephalitis virus are present in Angola, more studies of this virus in this locality, including serosurveillance, are needed. Increased levels of population movement between Asia and Africa may provide opportunities for pathogens to expand their geographic range. These data also highlight the potential usefulness of high-throughput sequencing, particularly untargeted approaches, for pathogen surveillance.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The authors present a convincing case for yellow fever and Japanese encephalitis viruses (JEV) coinfection of an individual in Angola. Finding yellow fever virus is not a surprise. Finding Japanese encephalitis virus is. This is the 1st ProMED-mail report of Japanese encephalitis virus presence in Angola.The genetic analysis of the 2 viruses provides proof that the viruses detected were the 2 that the authors indicated were present. Also, the possibility of laboratory contamination with Japanese encephalitis virus is ruled out. This observation clearly calls for additional field efforts to determine the prevalence of JEV in Angola. Sentinel pigs tested for JEV over time may provide additional evidence of presence of that virus in Angola.Maps of Angola can be seen at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/angola.pdf> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3670>. - Mod.TY]
