Stuff [edited]<http://www.stuff.co.nz/national/health/91528164/two-new-cases-of-typhoid-in-auckland-outbreak>There are now 20 confirmed cases of typhoid in the Auckland outbreak of the disease, which has killed 1 person. On [Wed 12 Apr 2017] evening, Auckland Regional Public Health Service (ARPHS) said ongoing testing had identified 2 more people infected. It was ""probable"" another person also had the infection. Typhoid is a bacterial infection caused by _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Typhi.The 2 newly confirmed cases weren't displaying typhoid symptoms, which can include fever, muscle aches, stomach pain and diarrhoea or constipation, the ARPHS said. Vague symptoms widely seen across a range of common illnesses can cause confusion and mean typhoid can be hard to spot and take some time diagnosing.Typhoid carriers can ""shed"" the bacterial disease for weeks after contracting it unwittingly exposing others to infection. The disease spreads person-to-person usually through poor toilet hygiene, baby changing, and food handling habits.On [Tue 28 Mar 2017], an as yet unnamed elderly Mt Roskill woman from a central Auckland Pacific Island church community died in Auckland Hospital from typhoid prompting a public and political backlash. Health authorities didn't notify the woman's family and the public of her death from the communicable disease until a week later through a media release. Family and friends of the woman had came into physical contact with the un-quarantined woman - another 10 people from her congregation contracted typhoid and were also hospitalized.At the time Auckland Regional Public Health Service clinical director Dr Julia Peters said the service delayed announcing her death to enable funeral arrangements to be concluded per the family's wishes.The ARPHS recommends anyone showing typhoid symptoms should see their doctor or an after-hours clinic, or contact Healthline on 0800 611 116.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[_Salmonella._ Typhi does not spread easily from person-to-person by casual contact. It would be expected that the cluster of cases were due to ingestion of food prepared by (perhaps) the index case.Typhoid fever, so-called enteric fever caused by _Salmonella enterica_ serotype Typhi, has a totally different presentation from that of the more common kinds of salmonellosis. Epidemiologically, usually spread by contaminated food or water, typhoid is not a zoonosis like the more commonly seen types of salmonellosis. Clinically, vomiting and diarrhea are typically absent; indeed, constipation is frequently reported. As it is a systemic illness, blood cultures are at least as likely to be positive as stool in enteric fever, particularly early in the course of the infection, and bone marrow cultures may be the most sensitive.The symptoms of classical typhoid fever typically include fever, anorexia, lethargy, malaise, dull continuous headache, non-productive cough, vague abdominal pain, and constipation. Despite the often high fever, the pulse is often only slightly elevated. During the 2nd week of the illness, there is protracted fever and mental dullness, classically called coma vigil. Diarrhea may develop but usually does not. Many patients develop hepatosplenomegaly [both liver and spleen enlarged]. After the 1st week or so, many cases develop a maculopapular rash on the upper abdomen. These lesions (""rose spots"") are about 2 cm in diameter and blanch on pressure. They persist for 2-4 days and may come and go. Mild and atypical infections are common.The word typhoid (as in typhus-like) reflects the similarity of the louse-borne rickettsial disease epidemic typhus and that of typhoid fever; in fact, in some areas, typhoid fever is still referred to as abdominal typhus. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/606>.]
