ABC News [edited]<http://abcnews.go.com/Health/wireStory/hylands-teething-tablets-recalled-levels-toxic-herb-46802614>The maker of Hyland's teething tablets has issued a recall for any remaining packages at the urging of US regulators, who say the medicine has inconsistent levels of an herb that can be poisonous. Standard Homeopathic Co of Los Angeles stopped making and shipping the tablets last October [2016]. It said that it is notifying distributors and stores to return any leftover products, while consumers should throw them out.The recall announced late [on] Thursday [13 Apr 2017] covers Hyland's Baby Teething Tablets and Hyland's Baby Nighttime Teething Tablets, meant to relieve gum discomfort from emerging teeth.The Food and Drug Administration, which has been investigating the safety of such products for some time, had issued a warning in September [2016] that homeopathic teething tablets containing the herb belladonna shouldn't be used. Belladonna, also called nightshade, is a poisonous herb that nonetheless has been used at low dosages as a homeopathic medicine for centuries. ""FDA believes that belladonna represents a serious health hazard to children and that the effects of belladonna are unpredictable,"" the company said in its recall notice.According to the FDA, some homeopathic teething products are made with very small amount of belladonna, but at levels so low they should not be detectible even with FDA's sophisticated testing. However, the agency found varying levels of belladonna when it tested Hyland's teething tablets, including some that far exceeded what was listed on the labels.The company stopped making the tablets, but the FDA had been urging the company to issue a recall for months. The FDA noted at the time that such tablets were sold online and in stores by Hyland's pharmacy chain CVS and other companies. CVS promptly pulled from store shelves and stopped online sales of all belladonna-containing teething products, including its store brand and Hyland's.FDA urged consumers to contact a doctor if young children who have used the teething tablets have symptoms including seizures, difficulty breathing, lethargy, skin flushing and agitation.[byline: Linda A Johnson]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[According to CNN in ProMED-mail post: Poisoning, belladonna - USA: homeopathic teething product recall 20170131.4806089:""Standard Homeopathic Co., the Los Angeles-based maker of Hyland's, discontinued its product 7 Oct [2016]. 'We discontinued it because we are committed to our moms and our dads who choose to trust us to put medicines in their young infants' mouths, and we didn't want to put them in a place between the FDA warning and us saying the product was safe and having to decide who to trust,' said Mary C Borneman, a spokeswoman for Hyland's.""In that same posting it was stated: ""Though Hyland's discontinued the product in October [2016?], it continued to affirm the safety on its website. 'Our understanding is that the Food and Drug Administration's investigation of these products is still ongoing,' says the company's news release issued at that time [October 2016?]. 'The fact is that we have not been made aware of any medical or statistical evidence to support a causal link between homeopathic teething tablets and adverse outcomes at this point. We continue to request any available information and statistics from the FDA.'""In that same post: ""The FDA release noted that Raritan Pharmaceuticals, based in New Jersey, recalled 3 of its belladonna-containing homeopathic products in November [2016], yet Hyland's had not issued a recall. 'They never actually asked us.'""It appears that Raritan Pharmaceuticals recalled its belladonna-containing homeopathic products, but Hyland's did not. It is startling to me that Hyland had complaints and human deaths and stopped making the product but never recalled the product. It seems that in some way they believed it was safe even though they allegedly stopped making the product.Belladonna alkaloids should have been so minute in the product that FDA or any testing agency would never have found them. That is the essence of homeopathic products. So, the fact that this had reportable levels calls into question whether it was truly homeopathic.The delay in a recall may be related to the fine line FDA is walking. FDA lacks authority on herbal remedies, as lobbyists have worked hard to make sure that they are not classified as a food or drug. However, FDA has moved on herbal products when there are dangers and deaths associated with them. Perhaps this is a new challenge, as it is homeopathic and not necessarily a food or a drug, and toxic elements should not be found in homeopathic products. As there are deaths from the product, it is surprising FDA did not move against the company sooner.On the flipside, it is disingenuous of the company to say [from the 1st paragraph]: ""We discontinued it because we are committed to our moms and our dads who choose to trust us to put medicines in their young infants' mouths, and we didn't want to put them in a place between the FDA warning and us saying the product was safe and having to decide who to trust."" Yet they never bothered to recall it. If they truly believe what they just said about trust from moms and dads, then a recall should have been issued the moment there was a death and detectible levels were found in the product. They should not have waited for FDA to tell/ask them to recall the product. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
