Relief Web, a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report [edited]<http://reliefweb.int/report/haiti/controlling-cholera-haiti-no-easy-task>When a 7.0 magnitude earthquake struck Haiti in 2010, approximately 230 000 people died and over a million were displaced. Approximately 9 months after the earthquake, the Haitian Ministry of Public Health and Population (MSPP) confirmed cases of cholera for the 1st time. Since the emergence of cholera, Haiti has reported about 805 000 suspected cases and nearly 9500 deaths. In 2016 alone, Haiti reported 41 421 suspected cholera cases and 447 cholera deaths.Cholera is an acute, diarrheal illness caused by the toxigenic bacterium _Vibrio cholera_ serogroup O1 or O139. A person can get cholera by drinking water or eating food contaminated with the bacterium. The majority of cholera cases are caused by the ingestion of water or food contaminated with the feces of a cholera-infected individual. The infection is often mild or without symptoms but can sometimes be severe, leading to swift dehydration and shock. It can be deadly within hours if not appropriately treated with oral or intravenous (IV) rehydration.Cholera persists in Haiti primarily because many Haitians lack access to clean water and proper sanitation. Although improvements have been made, such as increases in household water treatment and storage through the availability of liquid chlorine products, the cholera epidemic in Haiti (the largest documented cholera outbreak in recent history) remains ongoing.Cholera was prevalent in the USA in the 1800s for the same reasons it is prevalent now in Haiti. The USA eliminated cholera through constructing and improving water and sewage treatment systems. According to David Fitter, MD, country director for the U.S. CDC's office in Haiti, it will take a multipronged approach to eliminate the risk of cholera in Haiti, including further development of water, sanitation and hygiene infrastructure, and the selective use of oral cholera vaccines. ""CDC's assistance for cholera has focused on surveillance, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention, as well as on building the capacity of DINEPA to improve monitoring systems and increase water treatment and sanitation services.""Hurricane Matthew, a category 4 storm, hit the country in October 2016, hampering Haiti's ongoing efforts to control cholera. At least 500 Haitians lost their lives and about 140 000 were displaced. In response to Hurricane Matthew, CDC's Haiti and Atlanta offices supported the efforts of MSPP, the National Potable Water and Sanitation Directorate (DINEPA), and other partners to respond to the hurricane. CDC teams helped with several activities:-Conducting rapid assessments of damaged water systems and increasing availability of clean water by facilitating distribution of chlorine.- Investigating outbreaks of diarrheal disease. - Evaluating health facilities in hurricane-affected departments and assisting with continuity of key programs such as HIV and TB treatment.- Restoring functionality to public health surveillance systems. - Providing cholera culture training to lab technicians in Les Cayes (Sud Department).CDC continues to assist MSPP and DINEPA. The CDC Haiti office works with MSPP to support field surveillance and to build laboratory capacity. CDC also continues to deploy experts to Haiti to help with specialized areas of cholera control, such as properly chlorinating community water supplies.The response to Hurricane Matthew benefited from earlier responses following the earthquake and cholera outbreak in 2010. For example, household water treatment products, such as chlorine tablets, that have been distributed to citizens for years were well accepted and properly used in hurricane-affected areas because Haitians were familiar with these items.The battle against cholera in Haiti has demonstrated the value of building partnerships before a crisis. CDC Haiti built a strong relationship with MSPP and DINEPA for many years before Hurricane Matthew based on trust and mutual respect. It produced familiarity with each other's strengths, understanding of each other's perspectives, and the ability to translate scientific knowledge into effective actions within local communities. This enabled the public health agencies to provide a well-coordinated response.Restoring infrastructure and access to healthcare services is a crucial part of the long-term cholera response. Many partners worked together to repair damaged community water systems and to repair or reconstruct health facilities and cholera treatment centers. While Haiti continues to struggle with cholera, the combined efforts of MSPP, DINEPA, UNICEF, PAHO/WHO, CDC, USAID, and other organizations are strengthening the country's capacity to combat cholera and other infectious diseases. Haiti's improved capacity will help with preparedness and response to future public health threats in the country. Without the combined efforts by countless partners, the cholera epidemic could have claimed many more lives.[Byline: Adrienne Lefevre]----Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This disastrous epidemic of cholera in Haiti continues and will continue to spike until clean, safe water is available in the island country. - Mod.LL]******[2] Cholera - India (Odisha)Date: Mon 17 Apr 2017, 00:00 ISTSource: The Hindu [edited]<http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-otherstates/three-die-of-cholera-in-ganjam-district-of-odisha/article18073830.ece>Consumption of contaminated pana, the ritualistic drink related to Dandanata festival, has led to an outbreak of cholera and 3 people have died at Kadua village under Jaganathprasad block in Ganjam district of Odisha. A total of 76 people from the village with symptoms of cholera are now undergoing treatment at different medical centers.""All of them had consumed pana, called mahapuru pana, prepared in the village as part of Dandanata festival on Mahavishub Sankranti observed on [Fri 14 Apr 2017],"" said Chief District Medical Officer (CDMO) of Ganjam, Manoj Kumar Behera. The pana is a sweetened drink that includes fruits, cheese and other ingredients. Enquiry by medical authorities and statements of victims have revealed that the pana was prepared with water from a village pond being used for bathing as well as cleaning of body after defecation.During the 21-day-long Dandanata, members of Dandanata troupes live a nomadic life and also resort to defecation in the open, especially near water bodies. ""The pond water was contaminated and 'pana' led to suspected cholera outbreak,"" said Dr Behera. Kadua villagers started suffering from symptoms of cholera, including severe loose motions and vomiting, from [Sat 15 Apr 2017]. Some were admitted to the Jagannathprasad CHC. On [Sun 16 Apr 2017] evening, 41 patients from Kadua village were still undergoing treatment at the Jagannathprasad CHC, 32 in Bhanjanagar sub-divisional hospital, 2 were admitted in Alasuguma Primary Health Centre, while 1 patient has been shifted to MKCG medical college and hospital in Berhampur, said Dr. Behera. Ganjam District Collector Prem Chand Choudhary, State Director for Public Health Dr. Gyanindra Kumar Tripathy, the CDMO and other health and administrative officials rushed to the area.[Byline: Sib Kumar Das]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Cholera - India (Telangana)Date: Mon 17 Apr 2017, 5:39 AM ISTSource: Deccan Chronicle [edited]<http://www.deccanchronicle.com/lifestyle/health-and-wellbeing/170417/hyderabad-dirty-street-drinks-give-cholera.html>With 36 cases of cholera recorded in 2016 in Hyderabad city limits, health workers say that when contaminated water is mixed with ice, juice, sharbats or beverages in the street food or in bottling plants, chances of contracting cholera increase. A recent study published in the Journal of Tropical Diseases and Public Health found that ice is also a carrier of bacteria _Vibrio cholera_. The researchers studied over 200 cases in different parts of India of which 20 cases where studied in Hyderabad over a period of 2 years from 2014 to 2016.Dr R. Reddy, a post-graduate student who was a part of the research explained, ""The quality of water and it's testing in each batch and at regular intervals is important. We found that the cases which were reported in hospitals, both private and public, involved drinking juices with ice from street vendors or from hotels. Hence the water quality monitoring must be done not only by the unit but also by municipal authorities from time-to-time.""Random sampling and checking is important by authorities not only during the manufacturing phase but also during storage and transportation. The study observed that hygienic conditions have to be maintained even while storing and transporting ice so that the people do not contract the disease. Dr Reddy explained, ""There have been random cases which are reported from time-to-time every year. It is not an epidemic and continues to be sporadic which means that the source of the bacteria is from a food product which has not been manufactured or handled properly. These aspects need to be looked into and rectified with the help of authorities.""[Byline: Kaniza Garari]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] Cholera - Viet NamDate: Thu 13 Apr 2017Source: Science Daily [edited]<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/04/170413141128.htm>After more than a decade of declining cholera incidence, Viet Nam faced an increase in cases of the diarrheal disease during 2007-2010. Risk factors for contracting cholera in Ben Tre province of Viet Nam include drinking iced tea or unboiled water and having a water source near a toilet, researchers report in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.Around the world, more than a million people a year suffer from cholera and tens of thousands die from the disease. Cholera transmission is closely linked to inadequate access to clean water and is often spread through contaminated drinking water. In the Ben Tre province of the Mekong Delta region in the southern part of Vietnam, no cholera cases were reported from 2005 until an outbreak in 2010.In the new work, Thuong Vu Nguyen, of the Pasteur Institute Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam and colleagues interviewed 60 people who were confirmed to have been infected with cholera during the 2010 outbreak in Ben Tre, as well as 240 subcommune-, 5-year age group- and sex-matched controls. Information about each person's eating and drinking behaviors and living environment was recorded. The researchers also collected samples of nearby river water, drinking water, wastewater samples, and local seafood to test for _Vibrio cholerae_, the bacterium which spreads the disease.The researchers found that drinking iced tea, not always boiling drinking water, having a main water source near a toilet, living with other who have diarrhea, and having little or no education were all associated with an increased risk of cholera, while drinking stored rainwater, eating cooked seafood or steamed vegetables were protective against the disease. As many as 22 percent of people with cholera reported drinking iced tea in the week prior to their disease, whereas only 3 percent of controls had drank iced tea in the week before being interviewed. Patients with cholera were also more likely to always put ice in their water and to use sedimented river water for drinking, bathing, cooking, and brushing their teeth. More work is needed to determine why iced tea boosts the risk of cholera, but the researchers hypothesize that the bacteria may be found in ice, which is often bought from street vendors.""This present study has important implications for Viet Nam's cholera responses,"" the researchers say. ""Along with traditional approaches that focus on enhancement of safe water, sanitation, and food safety, combined with periodic provision of oral cholera vaccines, a water quality monitoring system at ice-making plants should be established.""Reference:Nguyen TV, Pham QD, Do QK, et al: Cholera returns to southern Vietnam in an outbreak associated with consuming unsafe water through iced tea: A matched case-control study. PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 2017; 11(4): e0005490 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005490.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Contaminated water remains the major risk factor for the acquisition of _V. cholerae_. As reported in Africa (currently in the Horn of Africa) periods of flooding and drought increase the risk of outbreaks. As demonstrated in Haiti the introduction of cholera into a country with a destroyed sanitary system and no underlying immunity can cause a major epidemic. In the classical endemic areas such as the Indian subcontinent and other areas in Asia, the postings above underscore the risk of ice as a source of cholera, as well as other fecal-oral transmitted diseases such as typhoid, norovirus and enterotoxigenic _E. coli_.There are few more important global public health issues than the ability to provide clean, safe water to the underserved populations of the world, particularly to children. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/152>.]
