Emerging Infectious Diseases (ahead of print) [edited]<https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/23/7/16-1693_article>Live cell therapy as potential risk factor for Q fever------------------------------------------------------Gram negative intracellular bacteria (_Coxiella burnetii_) cause Q fever, a zoonotic disease usually subclinical in livestock and humans. Typically, human patients show signs and symptoms, such as fever, severe headache, nausea, pneumonia, or hepatitis, 2-3 weeks after injection. Chronic Q fever develops in 1 per cent to 5 per cent of patients (1).On 5 Aug 2014, a local health department in the Federal State of the Rhineland Palatinate in southern Germany alerted the Federal State Agency for Consumer and Health Protection (FSACHP) (Landau, Germany) after detecting a cluster of 8 patients with pneumonia in a rural community during a 6-week period. The local health department and FSACHP started a joint outbreak investigation to identify cases, find the source of the outbreak, and stop disease transmission. On 12 Aug 2014, 5 of 8 patients tested by ELISA and immunofluorescence test (IFT) by the local health department had results consistent with acute _C. burnetii_ infection. The local health department issued a public health warning in the local media and advised anyone in the affected community with influenza-like symptoms or pneumonia in the past 4 months to be tested for Q fever by their general practitioner. In addition, the department offered free testing to pregnant women and persons with cardiovascular risk factors (for example, heart valve defects), irrespective of symptoms (2).Case-patients were defined as persons who had phase II IgM or IgG titers for Q fever by ELISA or IFT in 2014. Data for these case-patients were entered into the German Electronic Surveillance System for Infectious Disease Outbreaks (3). 13 residential case-patients (6 men, 7 women) who lived in the affected county (Bad Duerkheim) were identified; 11 reported symptoms compatible with Q fever, of whom 6 were hospitalized (figure [for figure, see original URL. - Mod.LL]). Median age for residential case-patients was 50 (range 32-59) years for women and 44 (range 26-56) years for men.Because all residential case-patients lived within 1.5 km of a flock of 1000 sheep, the FSACHP tested random samples from these sheep. Of 61 sheep tested, 25 were positive for _C. burnetii_ by ELISA of serum samples and 2 by PCR of vaginal swab specimens. During the investigation, the local health department discovered that young rams and pregnant ewes in the flock had been used as donor animals for live cell therapy (LCT) at 2 medical facilities in a district 10 km from the farm. LCT is injection of fetal cells or cell extracts from sheep into humans. The flock was banned for LCT production, and veterinary control measures (e.g., indoor housing and immunization of sheep) were initiated to stop transmission.Staff members of LCT facilities were offered serologic testing by ELISA or IFT. 16 persons with occupational cases (3 men, 13 women) were reported; 10 showed onset of disease, and 2 were hospitalized (figure). Median age for occupational case-patients was 48 (range 28-62) years for women and 45 (range 35-50) years for men.LCT is an alternative treatment (without medical evidence of effectiveness) that is marketed worldwide online. It consists of intramuscular injections of cell suspensions from fetal sheep to human recipients for rejuvenation (anti-aging) and other ailments. Apart from national recipients, medical tourists from North America and Asia travel to Germany to receive injections. In August, the FSACHP was notified of a patient from Canada who received LCT injections on 28 May 2014, and became ill in June 2014, before _C. burnetii_ was detected in the asymptomatic donor sheep herd (4,5).Newspaper coverage in October 2014 of the Q fever outbreak and the potential link to the LCT recipient from Canada alerted an LCT recipient in Germany who had recovered from a previously unidentified illness after receiving LCT in Rhineland Palatinate (4,6). The patient became ill (fever, severe diarrhea, and fatigue) 1 day after receiving LCT injections on 14 Jul 2014, lost 9 kg, and was hospitalized for 10 days. She was positive for Q fever by IFT in October 2014 and had a phase II IgG titer (1:65 536) that was higher than her phase I IgG titer (1:4096), which indicated a recent infection. She had no other contact with sheep or sheep products during her stay at the LCT facility or thereafter.A pharmacovigilance report by the Paul Ehrlich Institut (Langen, Germany) indicated that LCT treatment was the probable cause of the Q fever (7). The county ordered both LCT facilities to advise all 830 LCT recipients treated since January 2014 to consult their general practitioner about their possible risk for Q fever. This advice prompted 5 US citizens who received injections on 28 May 2014 in one of the clinics to be tested for Q fever. An investigation by the US CDC (Atlanta, GA, USA) identified recent Q fever in all 5 patients (phase II IgG titers <1:65 536 at 2-6 months postinjection) (5).Several facilities offer LCT in Germany, although the federal ministry of health recently released an assessment stating that the use of LCT is unsafe (8). Therefore, practitioners worldwide should be informed that working at an LCT clinic or receiving LCT injections should be considered potential risk factors for Q fever.References----------1. Maurin M, Raoult D. Q fever. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1999; 12: 518-553.2. District Administration of Bad Durkheim. Q fever information [in German] [cited 2015 Dec 6]. <http://www.kreis-bad-duerkheim.de/kv_bad_duerkheim/B%C3%BCrgerservice/Eintr%C3%A4ge/?bsinst=0&bstype=l_get&bsparam=217128>3. Faensen D, Claus H, Benzler J, et al. SurvNet@RKI--a multistate electronic reporting system for communicable diseases. Euro Surveill. 2006;11: 100-103.4. Zentis S. Q fever: infection possibly by fresh cell therapy/outbreak in Germany. ProMED-mail. 6 Oct 2014 [cited 6 Dec 2015]. <http://www.promedmail.org>, archive no. 20141006.2828583.5. Robyn MP, Newman AP, Amato M, et al. Q fever outbreak among travelers to Germany who received live cell therapy--United States and Canada, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015; 64: 1071-1073. 6. Becker A. Q fever from Palatinate to Canada? [in German]. The Palatinate of the Rhine. October 8, 2014 [cited 6 Dec 205]. <http://www.rheinpfalz.de/nachrichten/titelseite/artikel/q-fieber-aus-der-pfalz-nach-kanada/>7. Cussler K, Funk MB, Schilling-Lei D. Suspected transmission of Q fever by fresh cell therapy [in German]. Bulletin zur Arzneimittelsicherheit. 2015; 5: 13-15.8. Federal Health Office. Consolidated summary of the opinions of the Paul Ehrlich Institute and the Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices on parenteral application of fresh cells and xenogenic organ extracts in humans [in German] [cited 2017 Jan 13]. <http://www.bundesgesundheitsministerium.de/service/publikationen/gesundheit/details.html?bmg%5Bpubid%5D=2972>[authors: George M, Reich A, Cussler K, Jehl H, Burckhardt F]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This case report documents a parallel German case of acute _C. burnetii_ infection associated with the cases described in USA and Canadian individuals reported in 2014 and 2015.The following is a warning regarding this non-traditional therapy from the American Cancer Society (<http://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatmentsandsideeffects/complementaryandalternativemedicine/pharmacologicalandbiologicaltreatment/cell-therapy>):""Cell therapyOther common name(s): cellular therapy, fresh cell therapy, live cell therapy, glandular therapy, xenotransplant therapy""Description: in cell therapy, processed tissue from the organs, embryos, or fetuses of animals such as sheep or cows is injected into patients. Cell therapy is promoted as an alternative form of cancer treatment.""Overview: available scientific evidence does not support claims that cell therapy is effective in treating cancer or any other disease. Serious side effects can result from cell therapy. It may in fact be lethal; several deaths have been reported. It is important to distinguish between this alternative method involving animal cells and mainstream cancer treatments that use human cells, such as bone marrow transplantation.""How is it promoted for use? In cell therapy, live or freeze-dried cells or pieces of cells from the healthy organs, fetuses, or embryos of animals such as sheep or cows are injected into patients. This is supposed to repair cellular damage and heal sick or failing organs. Cell therapy is promoted as an alternative therapy for cancer, arthritis, heart disease, Down syndrome, and Parkinson disease.""Cell therapy is also marketed to counter the effects of aging, reverse degenerative diseases, improve general health, increase vitality and stamina, and enhance sexual function. Some practitioners have proposed using cell therapy to treat AIDS patients.""The theory behind cell therapy is that the healthy animal cells injected into the body can find their way to weak or damaged organs of the same type and stimulate the body's own healing process. The choice of the type of cells to use depends on which organ is having the problem. For instance, a patient with a diseased liver may receive injections of animal liver cells. Most cell therapists today use cells taken from taken from the tissue of animal embryos.""Supporters assert that after the cells are injected into the body, they are transported directly to where they are most needed. They claim that embryonic and fetal animal tissue contains therapeutic agents that can repair damage and stimulate the immune system, thereby helping cells in the body heal.""The alternative treatment cell therapy is very different from some forms of proven therapy that use live human cells. Bone marrow transplants infuse blood stem cells -- from the patient or a carefully matched donor -- after the patient's own bone marrow cells have been destroyed. Studies have shown that bone marrow transplants are effective in helping to treat several types of cancer. In another accepted procedure, damaged knee cartilage can be repaired by taking cartilage cells from the patient's knee, carefully growing them in the laboratory, and then injecting them back into the joint. Approaches involving transplants of other types of human stem cells are being studied as a possible way to replace damaged nerve or heart muscle cells, but these approaches are still experimental.""What does it involve? 1st, healthy live cells are harvested from the organs of juvenile or adult live animals, animal embryos, or animal fetuses. These cells may be taken from the brain, pituitary gland, thyroid gland, thymus gland, liver, kidney, pancreas, spleen, heart, ovaries, testicles, or even from whole embryos. Patients might receive one or several types of animal cells. Some cell therapists inject fresh cells into their patients. Others freeze them first, which kills the cells, and they may filter out some of the cell components. Frozen cell extracts have a longer ""shelf life"" and can be screened for disease. Fresh cells cannot be screened. A course of cell therapy to address a specific disease might require several injections over a short period of time, whereas cell therapy designed to treat the effects of aging and ""increase vitality"" may involve injections received over many months.""Animal cell extracts are also sold in pill form as dietary supplements, usually called glandular supplements. These, too, allegedly travel to organs of the same kind in the body to promote healing.""What is the history behind it? The Swiss physician Paul Niehans, MD, invented cell therapy in 1931. During a medical emergency, Dr Niehans injected a solution containing ground-up parathyroid cells from a calf into a patient who had damaged parathyroid glands. The patient recovered, and Dr Niehans attributed the improvement to the injection. He went on to apply the idea of animal-human cellular transfer to other diseases.""Dr Niehans claimed that he treated more than 30 000 patients with cell therapy. He also claimed that the death rate from cancer among his patients who received cell therapy was 5 times less than that of the average population. He believed that injections of cells from animals resistant to cancer would increase cancer resistance in humans. A 2nd physician announced similar findings 30 years later. Neither claim has ever been supported by research studies published in medical journals.""Cell therapy may be harmful and is not legally available in the United States. Because of safety concerns and lack of proof of its effectiveness, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has banned the import of cell therapy products into the country. The treatment is provided in clinics and spas in Europe, Mexico, and the Bahamas.""What is the evidence? None of the therapeutic success claimed by cell therapists has been documented through scientific testing and published in peer-reviewed medical journals. Claims of the therapy's success take the form of individual cases, testimonials, and publicity issued by practitioners of the therapy. Even supporters of cell therapy admit they do not know how cell therapy works in the body. No reliable evidence has been published in medical journals to support the claims of cell therapy.""Are there any possible problems or complications? These substances may have not been thoroughly tested to find out how they interact with medicines, foods, or dietary supplements. Even though some reports of interactions and harmful effects may be published, full studies of interactions and effects are not often available. Because of these limitations, any information on ill effects and interactions below should be considered incomplete.""Cell therapy may be dangerous, and several patient deaths linked to the therapy have been reported in the medical literature. Patients can contract bacterial and viral infections carried by the animal cells, and some have had life-threatening and even fatal allergic reactions. Other reports list complications such as brain swelling or the immune system attacking blood vessels or nerves following cellular treatment. Serious immune system reactions resulting in death have also been reported. Women who are pregnant or breast-feeding should not use this method, as its possible effects on a fetus are unknown.""A good recent review on Q fever can be found at:Melgar TA, Bauler TJ, Lutwick LI. Q fever in man: a One Health paradigm disease. In: The principles and practices of Q fever: the One Health paradigm. Simeos JCC, Anastacio SF, Da Silva GJ (eds). Nova Scientific Publishers: New York, 2017; pp 1-24. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/101>.]
