Standard Digital [edited]<https://www.standardmedia.co.ke/health/article/2001235855/thousands-of-kenyans-wrongly-diagnosed-treated-for-brucellosis>Thousands of Kenyans are being wrongly diagnosed and treated for the milk linked disease - brucellosis, reveals a new study. Now researchers at the Kenya Medical Research Institute (Kemri) and 6 international institutions, want the responsible test withdrawn from public hospitals. For example, in 2012 some 75 256 cases of brucellosis were reported to the Kenya Health Information System, but going by the new study only about 1 percent of these patients may have been infected.""It is that bad. The diagnosis for brucellosis has been a challenge and it is time we looked into it seriously,"" said study supervisor Prof Sam Kariuki of Kemri. Prof Kariuki said such an off mark diagnostic tool has serious costs and health implications to patients. ""It is also a serious contributor to the growing antimicrobial resistance in the country,"" he said of the study led by John Mwaniki Njeru also of Kemri.The test, called febrile antigen brucella agglutination test or FBAT is used in Government facilities throughout Kenya. ""It appears to have very poor diagnostic specificity and should be phased out,"" the study recommends. The study, published on [Fri 7 Apr 2017] in the journal PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, also involved the Nairobi-based International Livestock Research Institute and several research institutions from Germany, UK, Spain and Sweden.The researchers tested 825 patients for brucellosis at the Busia County Referral Hospital and at Kemri's Alupe clinic in the same area. The team used the regular government test FBAT, a 2nd one called Rose Bengal Test (RBT), while another 2 kits were used to confirm the results. Out of the 825 cases, 196 patients or 19.6 percent were found positive for brucellosis from the regular tests. However, when the positive cases were tested with the 2nd and the other confirmatory tests only 8 people or 1 percent of the total were found to have been infected with brucellosis. In this case, if not for the 2ary and confirmatory tests, 188 people would have unnecessarily been put on the brucellosis treatment.This is something the authors indicate may be happening across the country and especially among pastoralist communities who are normally in close contact with livestock. The researchers also suspected the reagents being marketed to and used in government facilities to test for brucellosis are of poor quality and hinted at the possibility of foul play in their procurement. They explain that while there are 2 strains of brucellosis which infect humans, there are no tests at clinic level which can distinguish between the 2. Yet Government health workers, the researchers said, claimed to be able to do so using varied reagents. They recommend that all possible efforts be made to ensure reagents are sourced only from established sources with high standards of quality control[Byline: Gatonye Gathura]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The publication referred to is:de Glanville WA, Conde-Ì lvarez R, MoriyÌ n I, et al: Poor performance of the rapid test for human brucellosis in health facilities in Kenya. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017;11(4):e0005508. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005508. Available (in uncorrected proof format) at: <http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005508>.Abstract--------""Human brucellosis is considered to be an important but typically under-diagnosed cause of febrile illness in many low and middle-income countries. In Kenya, and throughout East Africa, laboratory diagnosis for the disease is based primarily on the febrile antigen Brucella agglutination test (FBAT), yet few studies of the diagnostic accuracy of this test exist. Assessment of the performance of the FBAT is essential for its appropriate clinical use, as well as for evaluating surveillance data reported by public health systems. To assess FBAT performance, we collected sera from people with symptoms compatible with brucellosis attending 2 health facilities in Busia County, Kenya. Sera were tested using the FBAT and results compared with those from the Rose Bengal Test (RBT), an assay with well-known performance characteristics. Positives on either test were confirmed using the classical serum agglutination test (SAT)-Coombs test combination and a rapid IgM/IgG lateral flow immunochromatography assay (LFA). A questionnaire focusing on known risk factors for exposure to Brucella spp. was also conducted, and relationships with FBAT positivity examined using logistic regression. Out of 825 recruited individuals, 162 (19.6 percent) were classified as positive using the FBAT. In contrast, only eight (1.0 percent) were positive using the RBT. Of the 162 FBAT positives, one (0.62 percent) had an atypical agglutination in SAT and three (1.9 percent) showed low Coombs titres. Out of 148 FBAT positive individuals tested using the LFA, five (3.4 percent) were IgM positive and none were IgG positive. Poor or no correlation was observed between FBAT results and most established risk factors for Brucella infection. We observed substantial disagreement between the FBAT and a number of well-known serological tests, with the majority of reactive FBAT results appearing to be false positives. Poor FBAT specificity, combined with a lack of confirmatory testing, strongly suggests overdiagnosis of brucellosis is common in this low prevalence setting. This is expected to have important economic impact on affected patients subjected to the long and likely unnecessary courses of multiple antibiotics required for treatment of the disease.""There had been several older studies in this journal underscoring the usefulness of the screening test but perhaps production issues have intervened. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/174>.]
