Financial Times, a Neglected Tropical Diseases report [edited]<https://www.ft.com/content/51066cac-0024-11e7-8d8e-a5e3738f9ae4>When the health authorities in Fuenlabrada, a southwest suburb of Madrid, noticed a spike in cases of the tropical disease leishmaniasis in 2010, their efforts to track down its origins became an epidemiological detective story.Leishmaniasis has been endemic in dogs in southern Europe for centuries, but there is widespread acquired immunity among humans. Spain normally has about 200 cases in humans a year, but in the course of this outbreak (later determined as being between 2009 and 2015), 299 cases were reported in Madrid, 223 of them in Fuenlabrada.Dr Juan VÌ ctor San MartÌ n of the department of internal medicine at Fuenlabrada hospital spotted some anomalies. ""The number of people who were getting sick was much higher than expected and only a small number were in high-risk categories -- that is, small children or people who are immune-compromised, such as those with HIV,"" he says.The leishmaniasis parasite is transmitted to humans by a tiny, silent sandfly. There are 2 main types of the disease: cutaneous, which causes skin ulcers, and visceral, which affects the organs, especially the spleen and liver, and can be fatal if not treated. It is also carried by dogs. ""Cases among humans are always accompanied by an increase in infections among dogs,"" says Dr Javier Moreno, an immunologist and parasitologist at the National Microbiology Centre at the Carlos III Institute of Health in Madrid. ""We tested over 1000 dogs [in Fuenlabrada], but most were negative.""Puzzled, the scientists thought they might be facing a new strain of the disease for which humans had no acquired immunity. But the cause of the outbreak turned out to be more unusual.The epidemic shows it isn't just the movement of people and animals that spreads disease. A high proportion of the cases reported in Fuenlabrada were from an area near a park. ""The first thing we noticed [there] was the enormous number of hares and rabbits,"" says Dr Ricardo Molina, a specialist in medical entomology at the National Microbiology Centre. The triangular park is bordered by 2 main roads and a housing development. When the 2nd road was completed in 2008, the animals were effectively trapped in the park but also isolated from natural predators -- sparking a population explosion.Molina had a theory: ""We deduced that with so many hares there was probably a large population of the sandflies, too, as hare's blood is one of its favourite foods. When we analyzed the flies' blood, most of it was from rabbits, then hares, then humans. We found blood from a dog in only 1 fly.""Moreno says it was an example of how several social and environmental factors, none significant in itself, can come together to cause an epidemic. ""It would have been almost impossible to anticipate,"" he says.In 2011, the hares and rabbits were culled and the area fumigated to kill the flies. However, San MartÌ n criticizes the health authorities for not alerting the public to the outbreak until mid-2011 and says the response to the epidemic was badly coordinated (leishmaniasis is a notifiable disease, so the authorities would have been alerted from the start). He adds that while some people blame immigration for the spread of tropical diseases, immigrants in fact often suffer more than indigenous peoples. ""Many of my patients are sub-Saharan Africans and have been affected disproportionately because of their lack of immunity,"" he says.""What we've learnt from [the] Fuenlabrada [outbreak] is that the transmission of these diseases is complex and changeable,"" says Dr Albert Picado, leishmaniasis coordinator at the Barcelona Institute for Global Health. ""The Madrid epidemic shows the effects that a change in land use can have. It isn't just the movement of people and animals that spread diseases.""Leishmaniasis is inching its way north. A 2016 British study estimated there were 60 000-80 000 infected dogs in the UK. This is partly a result of people taking their pets on holiday, Moreno says, or adopting Spanish strays. ""With global warming [the sandflies] will move north and we will start seeing cases [in humans].""The 6th World Congress on leishmaniasis will be held in Toledo, Spain, on May 16-20 (<worldleish2017.org>).[Byline: Stephen Burgen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It was hypothesized already in 2013 that hares and rabbits were the main reservoir in Fuenlabrada, a suburb of Madrid (see the ProMED posting below from the 17 Feb 2013). With the identification of hare and rabbit blood in the sandfly vector this seems to be confirmed. Already in 2013, the Spanish authorities initiated a reduction of the hare and rabbit population by hunting, and the cases decreased. These data underline that perhaps other mammals aside from dogs and small rodents can act as reservoir of _Leishmania_. - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/25628>.]
