PAHO/WHO Epidemiological Update Yellow Fever [edited]<http://www2.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=39286&lang=en>Situation summary in the Americas---------------------------------Since epidemiological week (EW) 1 to EW 15 of 2017 [1 Jan-14 Apr 2017], Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and Suriname have reported suspected and confirmed yellow fever cases.Following is an update on the situation in Brazil.In Brazil, since the beginning of the outbreak in December 2016 up to 12 Apr 2017, there were 2422 cases of yellow fever reported (623 confirmed, 1128 discarded, and 671 suspected under investigation), including 326 deaths (209 confirmed, 53 discarded, and 64 under investigation). The case fatality rate (CFR) is 34 percent among confirmed cases.According to the probable site of infection, the cases were reported in 359 municipalities, while the confirmed cases were distributed among 108 municipalities in 5 states (EspÌ rito Santo, Minas Gerais, ParÌÁ, Rio de Janeiro, and SÌ£o Paulo).With regard to the confirmed fatal cases and their probable site of infection, 151 were in Minas Gerais, 4 in SÌ£o Paulo, 48 in EspÌ rito Santo, four in ParÌÁ, and 2 in Rio de Janeiro. In descending order, the CFR among confirmed cases by state is 100 percent in ParÌÁ, 80 percent in SÌ£o Paulo, 34 percent in Minas Gerais, 31 percent in EspÌ rito Santo, and 20 percent in Rio de Janeiro.In the state of Minas Gerais, no new suspected cases have been reported since 23 Mar 2017, and the date of symptoms onset of the last reported case is 14 Mar 2017. In the state of EspÌ rito Santo, since EW 9 of 2017 [week ending 4 Mar 2017], a 2nd increase has been observed in the number of cases, the majority of which are being reported from municipalities in the south of the state. Local and state authorities are intensifying immunization activities in the area and the possibility that additional cases could be detected among susceptible persons in the area is not excluded.In Rio de Janeiro, an increase in the number of suspected cases was observed between [15-25 Mar 2017] however, no new cases have been reported since [6 Apr 2017] (Figure 1). Of the 10 confirmed cases, 8 had as probable site of infection the municipality of Casimiro de Abreu, one had the municipality of SÌ£o Fidelis, and the probable site of infection for the case who resided in PorciÌ¼ncula is still under investigation.Moreover, in the state of ParÌÁ, the number of confirmed cases remains unchanged from EW 13 of 2017.To date, _Aedes aegypti_ has not been reported to have a role in transmission. However, confirmed epizootics in large cities, such as Vitoria in EspÌ rito Santo and Salvador in Bahia, represent a high risk for a change in the transmission cycle.Figure 1 [graphs]. Distribution of reported yellow fever cases by date of symptoms onset and probable state of infection. Brazil, 1 Dec 2016-13 Apr 2017.Figure 2 illustrates the municipalities with confirmed cases and cases under investigation, as well as confirmed epizootics, and epizootics under investigation that correspond to the cumulative total in three different dates.Figure 2 [maps]. Geographic distribution of reported human yellow fever cases and yellow fever epizootics, 31 Jan-2 Mar, and 12 Apr 2017.Reports of epizootics currently under investigation in states bordering Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela represent a risk of spread of the virus to the bordering countries, especially in areas with similar ecosystems.Recommendations---------------Given the current yellow fever situation in Brazil and the emergence of cases in areas where cases have not been detected in several years, the Pan American Health Organization, Regional Office of the World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) urges Member States to continue efforts to detect, confirm, and adequately and timely treat cases of yellow fever. To this end, health care workers should be kept up-to-date and trained to detect and treat cases especially in areas of known virus circulation.PAHO/WHO encourages Member States to take the necessary actions to keep travelers, heading to areas where yellow fever vaccination is mandatory, informed and vaccinated.Vaccination-----------The yellow fever vaccine is safe and affordable and provides effective immunity against the disease in the range of 80 to 100 percent of those vaccinated after 10 days and 99 percent immunity after 30 days. A single dose provides life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine is not needed. There have been rare reports of serious side- effects from the yellow fever vaccine.Given the limitations on the availability of vaccines and with the aim of promoting the rational use, PAHO / WHO reiterates its recommendations to national authorities:1. Conduct an assessment of vaccination coverage against yellow fever in areas at risk at the municipal level to guarantee at least 95 percent coverage among the resident population of these areas.2. Countries that are not currently experiencing outbreaks should not conduct immunization campaign. Priority should be given to the use of vaccines in susceptible populations and to avoid revaccination.3. Ensure vaccination of all travelers to endemic areas at least 10 days before traveling.4. Depending on vaccine availabilities, Member States should have a small stock that allows them to respond to outbreaks.5. Postpone routine vaccination in children in non-endemic areas until sufficient vaccines are available. Once there is availability, catch-up campaigns should be conducted to complete vaccination schedules.Precautions-----------It is recommended to individually assess the epidemiological risk of contracting disease when faced with the risk of an adverse event occurring in persons over 60 years who have not been previously vaccinated.- The vaccine can be offered to individuals with asymptomatic HIV infection with CD4+ counts 200 cells/mm3 or more requiring vaccination.- Pregnant women should be vaccinated in an emergency situation and following recommendations of health authorities.- Vaccination is recommended in lactating women who live in endemic areas, since the risk of transmitting the vaccine virus to the child is lower than the benefits of the vaccination of breastfeeding women.- For pregnant or lactating women traveling to areas with yellow fever transmission, vaccination is recommended when travel cannot be postponed or avoided. They should receive advice on the potential benefits and risks of vaccination to make an informed decision. The benefits of breastfeeding are superior to those of other nutritional alternatives.The following people are usually excluded from yellow fever vaccination:- Immunocompromised individuals (Including those with thymus disorders, symptomatic HIV, malignant neoplasms under treatment, and those that are receiving or have received immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory treatments, recent transplants, and current or recent radiation therapy).- People with severe allergies to eggs and their derivatives.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[It is critically important that the yellow fever (YF) vaccination campaigns in the affected areas proceed as swiftly as possible. So far, all cases have been reported as coming from the sylvan (forest) transmission cycle. The concern is that the virus not become transmitted in the urban, _Aedes aegypti_ cycle, particularly in the large cities with the attendant risk of dissemination to YF-free areas that have populations of this YF virus vector.This YF outbreak is a non-human primate conservation concern, as noted in an 18 Apr 2017 report. In an effort to prevent people from killing the monkeys in the belief that monkeys are responsible for the YF outbreak, authorities are trying to educate people on the issue, and police are investigating anyone who kills one of the monkeys. (<http://www.newsy.com/stories/rare-monkeys-are-dying-of-yellow-fever-in-brazil/>).A US CDC reported that in response to this outbreak, Brazil health authorities have recently expanded the list of areas in which yellow fever vaccination is recommended for travelers. Yellow fever vaccination is now recommended in all of EspÌ rito Santo and Rio de Janeiro states; SÌ£o Paulo state, with the exception of the urban area of the city of SÌ£o Paulo; and a number of municipalities in the state of Bahia.The Brazilian Ministry of Health maintains a list of all other municipalities in Brazil for which yellow fever vaccination continues to be recommended (not including recently added municipalities). It is located at <http://portalsaude.saude.gov.br/images/pdf/2015/novembro/19/Lista-de-Municipios-ACRV-Febre-Amarela-Set-2015.pdf>.Maps of Brazil can be accessed at <http://s13.postimg.org/jumnalk87/map_of_Brazil.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>. - Mod.TY]
