VietnamNet [edited]<http://english.vietnamnet.vn/fms/business/176794/fda-warns-vietnam-largest-processor-over-seafood-poisoning.html>Vietnamese Ba Hai Company Limited received a warning letter dated [21 Mar 2017] from the FDA over its fish and fishery products examined at an importer located in USA. The FDA inspected the Crystal Cove Seafood Corporation in Floral Park, New York last [13 Oct 2016] to assess the compliance by the company with US seafood Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) regulations. The trading and importing company was found importing various fish and fishery products from a facility owned by Ba Hai located in Vietnam. FDA said the HACCP plan of Ba Hai for scombroid species of fish contains 'serious deviations' from requirements, enough so that its frozen scombroid species of fish are considered contaminated.Scombroid fish poisoning is a toxic reaction to decomposing scombroid fish, such as mackerel, tuna, bonito, kahawai and butterfly kingfish -- all of which have dark flesh. Occasionally other fish species are involved. Scombroid fish contain a chemical called histidine. Bacteria multiply in fish stored in warm conditions (over 15 deg.C, approx. 59 deg.F) and turn the histidine into scombrotoxin. The main component of scombrotoxin is histamine, which is responsible for the symptoms of scombroid poisoning. Cooking the fish does not reduce histamine levels even though the causative bacteria have been destroyed.The FDA requires fish to have a histamine level of less than 50 mg/kg; a level of 200 mg/kg or above is considered hazardous.The warning letter says Ba Hai should keep its product ""out of commerce until the cause of the deviation is corrected at the Receiving, Preserve (Anneal), and Pre-Chilled critical control points to control scombrotoxin formation.""The FDA also warns that if it finds the response of Ba Hai inadequate, it may take further action including refusing to admit the scombroid species of fish import to the US. This includes the possibility the products could be detained at the US border without physical examination. In addition to providing Ba Hai with internet access to the 4th Edition Hazards Guide, the FDA warning letter also provides detailed instruction on how the company might go about correcting the specific deviations, including instructions for harvesting and holding on fishing vessels prior to processing.The Vietnam Association of Seafood Exporters and Producers lists Ba Hai Company Limited as using HACCP as a quality control system. The company is one of the leading seafood processors in Vietnam and exporters of frozen tuna, treated tuna loin, ribbon fish, shell swimming crabs, and other fishery products. The privately held Crystal Cove Seafood Corp. engages in trading and importing frozen seafood items for wholesalers, traders, retail and restaurant chains, and processors primarily in the USA. It was founded in 1980 and is headquartered in Floral Park, NY.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Two good reviews on the subject can be found at:1.- Taylor SL, Stratton JE and Nordlee JA: Histamine poisoning (scombroid fish poisoning): an allergy-like intoxication. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1989;27(4-5):225-40.Abstract--------Histamine poisoning results from the consumption of foods, typically certain types of fish and cheeses that contain unusually high levels of histamine. Spoiled fish of the families, Scombridae and Scomberesocidae (e.g. tuna, mackerel, bonito), are commonly implicated in incidents of histamine poisoning, which leads to the common usage of the term, ""scombroid fish poisoning"", to describe this illness. However, certain non-scombroid fish, most notably mahi-mahi, bluefish, and sardines, when spoiled are also commonly implicated in histamine poisoning. Also, on rare occasions cheeses, especially Swiss cheese, can be implicated in histamine poisoning. The symptoms of histamine poisoning generally resemble the symptoms encountered with IgE-mediated food allergies. The symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, an oral burning sensation or peppery taste, hives, itching, red rash, and hypotension. The onset of the symptoms usually occurs within a few minutes after ingestion of the implicated food, and the duration of symptoms ranges from a few hours to 24 h. Antihistamines can be used effectively to treat this intoxication. Histamine is formed in foods by certain bacteria that are able to decarboxylate the amino acid, histidine. However, foods containing unusually high levels of histamine may not appear to be outwardly spoiled. Foods with histamine concentrations exceeding 50 mg per 100 g of food are generally considered to be hazardous. Histamine formation in fish can be prevented by proper handling and refrigerated storage while the control of histamine formation in cheese seems dependent on insuring that histamine-producing bacteria are not present in significant numbers in the raw milk.2.- Hungerford JM: Scombroid poisoning: a review. Toxicon. 2010 Aug 15;56(2):231-43. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2010.02.006. Abstract available at: <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0041010110000450>.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/152>.]
