CBSLA News [edited]<http://losangeles.cbslocal.com/2017/04/19/two-cases-of-infant-botulism-reported-in-calabasas-park/>Local health officials tried to calm parents [Wed 19 Apr 2017] after 2 families claimed their babies contracted botulism in a Calabasas park [Los Angeles County]. Health officials said Grape Arbor Park is no more dangerous than any place where babies come into contact with dirt. Whether it was coincidence or out of concern, the park in Calabasas was empty all Wednesday afternoon [19 Apr 2017].The city confirmed it has received 2 separate claims that babies contracted infant botulism at the park in the fall after the soil was disturbed at a nearby freeway construction site along the 101 Freeway and Lost Hills Road. City officials said there was no need to panic, and that it was working with the county health department to prevent future cases.Infant botulism is a serious but extremely rare disease, caused by babies ingesting botulism spores -- most commonly from dirt or dust. ""They get into the babies intestines and release the toxins, and it can cause serious paralysis. Everything gets weak, floppy. They can't eat. They can't breathe, and that's when they potentially can die,"" said pediatrician Dr Tanya Altmann. She said she has received phone calls from worried parents, wondering if the park was safe. At least one local coach has cancelled baseball practice at the park.Infant botulism is treatable and typically affects babies between the ages of 3 and 8 months.Health officials said it would be impossible to pinpoint where a child contracted infant botulism. At this time, city officials said they believed the park was safe for all ages. ""Based on the information that we have available, I do not see any concerns or risks in Calabasas for kids playing in the park, playing in the dirt,"" Altmann agreed. But she cautioned that ""if you do notice that your child isn't acting well -- if they seem lethargic, if they're having trouble swallowing. Anything that concerns you, call your pediatrician and have them evaluated.""Health officials said botulism is rare. There were only 18 confirmed cases last year [2016] in Los Angeles County. And there was only one case in Calabasas, despite the fact that there were 2 reports in the city.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Initially, infant botulism was linked to feeding infants honey, most cases are no longer linked to this vehicle. Spores of _Clostridium botulinum_ are ubiquitous in the environment and many times a specific source is not discovered. Whether the road construction work near the California park will be shown to be the source is not likely. It should be noted that even totally breast-fed infants can develop this entity.The following is extracted from the CDC report on infant botulism in New York City (ProMED-mail post Infant botulism - USA (New York City) 20030117.0144):""Intestinal botulism is the commonest form of human botulism in the USA; about 100 cases are reported among infants in the USA annually. Intestinal botulism occurs rarely in older children and adults [this form has been also referred to as adult colonization botulism. - Mod.LL] Intestinal botulism results from colonization and bacterial production of botulinum toxin in the colon. Swallowing ambient _Clostridium botulinum_ spores, which exist worldwide in soil and dust, has been proposed as the principal route of exposure; honey is an avoidable source of some causative spores. A common source of exposure is not usually identified; apparent clusters are rare and often remain unexplained after investigations are complete. In a cluster of infant botulism cases identified previously in the mid-Atlantic region of the USA, no common source of exposure was identified.""Botulism should be suspected in previously healthy infants aged less than 12 months old who are constipated and who exhibit weakness in sucking, swallowing, or crying; hypotonia [decreased muscle tone]; and progressive bulbar and extremity muscle weakness. About half of patients require mechanical ventilation during hospitalization. Lumbar puncture and brain imaging generally yield normal results but can help differentiate among other causes of flaccid weakness. When infant botulism is suspected, local and state health departments should be notified promptly to arrange diagnostic stool testing.""Although not specifically stated in this post, botulism immune globulin (BIG) is indicated in infants with clinically diagnosed infant botulism, before diagnostic confirmation. The prompt use of this specific immunoglobulin leads to a significant decrease in both ICU and total hospital stay. Reviews regarding BIG use and infant botulism can be found in the references below.References----------1. Underwood K, Rubin S, Deaker T, Newth C: Infant botulism: A 30-year experience spanning the introduction of botulism immune globulin intravenous in the intensive care Unit at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles. Pediatrics 2007; 120(6): e1380-5; available at <http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/120/6/e1380.long>.2. Pifko E, Price A, Sterner S: Infant botulism and indications for administration of botulism immune globulin. Pediatric Emerg Care 2014; 30(2): 120-4; quiz 125-7. doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000000079; abstract available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24488164>.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/19921>.]
