MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:408-409 [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6615a3.htm?s_cid=mm6615a3_e#suggestedcitation>Tutolo JW, Staples JE, Sosa L, Bennett N. Notes from the Field: Powassan Virus Disease in an Infant -- Connecticut, 2016.In early November 2016, a previously healthy male infant aged 5 months from eastern Connecticut developed fever and vomiting. Right-sided facial twitching began over the next several days, and progressed to seizures that included rightward eye deviation and right arm stiffening. He was admitted to the hospital for evaluation and management of his seizures. There was no travel history; however, the parents reported that 2 weeks earlier, the infant had been bitten by a tick most likely carried into the home on a family member's clothing. The estimated time of tick attachment was <3 hours.Head computed tomography scan, complete blood count, and serum electrolytes were normal. A lumbar puncture was performed; white blood cell count in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was 125/ë L (81 percent lymphocytes) (reference range = 0-15 cells/ë L). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed a symmetric pattern of restricted diffusion (suggestive of cellular edema) involving the basal ganglia, rostral thalami, and left pulvinar, consistent with encephalitis. There were no findings of hemorrhage, and the lesions did not enhance, indicating normal local blood flow and minimal inflammation. Testing for common nonarboviral causes of encephalitis was negative, as were CSF bacterial cultures and respiratory viral cultures.Because of the clinical and MRI findings, and the confirmed brief tick attachment, CDC testing for evidence of infection with Powassan virus (POWV) was requested by the attending infectious diseases specialist. The CSF sample obtained on admission (4 days after illness onset) was positive for POWV immunoglobulin M, with a POWV-specific neutralizing antibody titer of 32. The child's seizures were controlled with anticonvulsant therapy with fosphenytoin and levetiracetam, and he was discharged home after 7 days on oral levetiracetam. One month after the onset of symptoms the parents noted that he could no longer sit up unaided, a milestone that he had met prior to the illness. He was reported to have normal motor and verbal development (crawling, walking with a walker, and babbling) 4 months after his illness (aged 10 months). He was noted to have a distinct left-handed preference. He was no longer receiving physical or occupational therapy, and was no longer on any antiepileptics. A 2nd MRI performed 4 months after the first revealed gliosis and encephalomalacia in the thalami and basal ganglia bilaterally, with volume loss and evidence of early mineralization in the left basal ganglia.POWV is a tickborne flavivirus, similar to tickborne encephalitis virus, transmitted by _Ixodes scapularis_, _I. cookei_, and _I. marxi_ ticks. Transmission of POWV occurs as quickly as 15 minutes after tick attachment. Clinical presentations of POWV infection range from a febrile illness to severe neurologic disease, with death occurring in approximately 10 percent of reported cases; long-term sequelae are common.During 2006-2015, a median of 7 cases of POWV disease (range = 1-12) were reported annually in the United States (1). Cases occur predominantly in the Northeast and Great Lakes region; several states (Minnesota, New Hampshire, and Virginia) reported their 1st POWV disease cases during the last 7 years; it is not known whether this represents spread of the virus within the local tick population, or increased testing and recognition of the virus as a cause of human disease. Despite POWV-infected ticks having been found in Connecticut, this is the 1st report of a human case of POWV disease in the state and highlights the importance of considering POWV disease in persons with a clinically compatible illness and obtaining a comprehensive exposure history. Although the illness onset for this patient (early November 2016) was later than might be expected for encephalitis caused by mosquito borne arboviruses (e.g., West Nile virus, which is more common in the summer months), ticks can be active well before and after peak mosquito season. It is important for clinicians to consider POWV disease whenever a patient in a tick-endemic area is evaluated for encephalitis. Testing for POWV infection is not usually included on arbovirus encephalitis panels and should be requested specifically, as was done in this case. The short attachment time required to transmit POWV highlights the importance of avoiding tick exposure through the use of repellents or wearing permethrin-treated clothing. Tick checks should be performed as soon as possible after exposure, including showering to remove any nonattached ticks, and clothing should be changed afterward.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report illustrates the need to avoid tick bites and to examine the body for the presence of ticks. Because the deer tick, _Ixodes scapularis_ is so small, it is easily overlooked.The USA CDC notes: ""Human Powassan (POW) virus infections have been recognized in the United States, Canada and Russia. In the United States, cases of POW virus disease have been reported primarily from northeastern states and the Great Lakes region. These cases occur primarily in the late spring, early summer and mid-fall when ticks are most active. POW virus disease cases are rare but the reported number of cases has increased in recent years. All residents of and visitors to areas where POW virus activity has been identified are at risk of infection. People who engage in outdoor work and recreational activities in endemic areas are at increased risk of infection"" (<http://www.cdc.gov/powassan/statistics.html>).There is no commercially available vaccine for Powassan virus. The best way to prevent infection is to avoid tick bites. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/210>.]
