WHO, Influenza at the Human-Animal Interface (HAI) [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/human_animal_interface/Influenza_Summary_IRA_HA_interface_04_20_2017.pdf?ua=1>Summary [16 Mar to 20 Apr 2017]----------------------------------- New infections: Since the previous update, new human infections with influenza A(H7N9) and A(H9N2) viruses were reported.- Risk assessment: The overall public health risk from currently known influenza viruses at the human-animal interface has not changed, and the likelihood of sustained human-to-human transmission of these viruses remains low. Further human infections with viruses of animal origin are expected.- IHR compliance: All human infections caused by a new influenza subtype are required to be reported under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005). This includes any animal and non-circulating seasonal influenza viruses. Information from these notifications is critical to inform risk assessments for influenza at the human-animal interface.Avian influenza A(H5) viruses-----------------------Current situation: Since the last update, no new laboratory-confirmed human cases of influenza A(H5) virus infection were reported to WHO. Influenza A(H5) subtype viruses have the potential to cause disease in humans, and thus far, no human cases, other than those with influenza A(H5N1) and A(H5N6) viruses, have been reported to WHO. According to reports received by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE), various influenza A(H5) subtypes continue to be detected in birds in Africa, Europe and Asia.Avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses------------------------Current situation: During this reporting period, 86 laboratory-confirmed human cases of influenza A(H7N9) virus infection were reported to WHO from China. Case details are presented in the table in the annex of this document. For additional details on these cases, public health interventions, and the recently detected highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) A(H7N9) viruses, see the Disease Outbreak News.As of 20 Apr 2017, a total of 1393 laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses, including at least 534 deaths, have been reported to WHO.According to reports received by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) on surveillance activities for avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses in China, positives among virological samples continue to be detected mainly from live bird markets and some commercial and backyard farms.Risk Assessment:1. What is the likelihood that additional human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses will occur?Most human cases are exposed to the A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, further human cases can be expected. Additional sporadic human cases of influenza A(H7N9) in other provinces in China that have not yet reported human cases are also expected.2. What is the likelihood of human-to-human transmission of avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses? Even though small clusters of cases have been reported, including those involving healthcare workers, currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood is low.3. What is the risk of international spread of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus by travellers?Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.Avian influenza A(H9N2) viruses---------------------------Current situation: One new laboratory-confirmed human case of A(H9N2) virus infection was reported to WHO from China in an 11-month-old boy from Gansu province. The case developed mild illness on 6 Feb 2017, was hospitalized and has recovered. He had exposure to backyard poultry prior to illness onset. This is the 1st human case of avian influenza A(H9N2) virus infection reported to WHO since December 2016 and the 1st human case reported from Gansu province. Avian influenza A(H9N2) viruses are enzootic in poultry in China.Risk Assessment:1. What is the likelihood that additional human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H9N2) viruses will occur?Most human cases are exposed to the A(H9N2) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments. Human infection tends to result in mild clinical illness. Since the virus continues to be detected in poultry populations, further human cases can be expected.2. What is the likelihood of human-to-human transmission of avian influenza A(H9N2) viruses?No case clusters have been reported. Currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood is low.3. What is the risk of international spread of avian influenza A(H9N2) virus by travellers?Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.Overall Risk Management Recommendations:-------------------------------- WHO does not advise special traveller screening at points of entry or restrictions with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. For recommendations on safe trade in animals from countries affected by these influenza viruses, refer to OIE guidance.- WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travellers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.- Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health.- Continued vigilance is needed within affected and neighbouring areas to detect infections in animals and humans. As the extent of virus circulation in animals is not clear, epidemiological and virological surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should remain high.- All human infections caused by a new influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005). State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.- It is critical that influenza viruses from animals and people are fully characterized in appropriate animal or human health influenza reference laboratories and reported according to international standards. Under WHO's Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework, Member States are expected to share their influenza viruses with pandemic potential on a regular and timely basis with the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS), a WHO-coordinated network of public health laboratories. The viruses are used by the public health laboratories to assess the risk of pandemic influenza and to develop candidate vaccine viruses.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Important links shared in the report:WHO Human-Animal Interface web page:<http://www.who.int/influenza/human_animal_interface/en/>Cumulative Number of Confirmed Human Cases of Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Reported to WHO:<http://www.who.int/influenza/human_animal_interface/H5N1_cumulative_table_archives/en/>Avian Influenza A(H7N9) Information:<http://who.int/influenza/human_animal_interface/influenza_h7n9/en/index.html>WHO Avian Influenza Food Safety Issues:<http://www.who.int/foodsafety/areas_work/zoonose/avian/en/>World Organisation of Animal Health (OIE) web page: Web portal on Avian Influenza:<http://www.oie.int/animal-health-in-the-world/web-portal-on-avian-influenza/>Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) webpage on avian influenza:<http://www.fao.org/avianflu/en/index.html>OFFLU: <http://www.offlu.net/index.html>.Currently, the threat posed by the increased number of human cases of avian influenza A/H7N9 is growing, and even though the human-to-human transmission potential has remained minimal, the number of human cases is much higher, and this avian virus could be the next pandemic threat. - Mod.UBA]
