Deccan Chronicle [edited]<http://www.deccanchronicle.com/lifestyle/health-and-wellbeing/240417/kerala-caution-against-hepatitis-a-outbreak.html>Nearly 40 cases of hepatitis A were reported so far as on [Sun 23 Apr 2017], from Kalamassery Municipality with 21 cases being reported from the Ernakulam Medical College alone. Meanwhile the Food Safety Department carried out raids at eateries and collected water samples for examination.""The number of cases reported from the Ernakulam Medical College alone is 21, though the disease has also been reported from other areas, too. In most of the cases, the patients are those who eat from outside on a regular basis, like street food vendors. For instance the NUALS hostel from where 9 cases were reported,"" said N. K. Kuttapan, district medical officer.""An intensive raid was conducted by the Food Safety Department in and around Kalamasserry area in connection with the reports of hepatitis A outbreak. The squads collected water samples from various sources for chemical and microbiological examination. A total of 3 hotels including 'Pallath' Restaurant, Kalamasserry, are directed to close down and take rectification measures immediately,"" said Shibu K. V., assistant food safety commissioner. The Health department authorities have already issued an alert as the hostels of the MBBS students of Medical College and that of NUALS (National University of Advanced Legal Studies) were closed.The public has been warned against using contaminated water for cooking and cleaning utensils. Hotels, canteens and catering units have been instructed to use only boiled water for drinking. Health card is mandatory for all employees, especially those who cook or handle food items. Uncooked salads, ice creams and cool drinks being sold in unhygienic condition from outside should be avoided. The authorities have also asked to chlorinate wells and warned against using water from un-chlorinated wells. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Since more than half of the reported cases are from a medical college, clearly cases are occurring in adults. Assuming the diagnoses have been made serologically (by the presence of IgM anti-HAV), it is likely that those infected came from areas of India where clean, safe water was available. Seroprevalence rates in the developing world for past HAV can be as high as 100 percent by age 10. Because of this, large waterborne outbreaks of viral hepatitis have been hepatitis E. - Mod.LL]
