New York Post [edited]<http://nypost.com/2017/04/19/is-the-city-giving-up-on-protecting-infants-from-herpes/>Faced with an uncooperative community that refuses to police itself, the city Health Department now says it can't identify the mohels whom it believes infected 4 infant boys with herpes. Even the parents of the infected babies are refusing to name the persons who performed a controversial circumcision ritual on their sons, a spokesman told DNAinfo.""Some in the community are resistant to sharing the name of the mohels,"" said department spokesman Christopher Miller. The 2 mohels who have been ID'd are protected from being publicly named because of privacy laws regarding their health status -- but at least the city's been able to test them for herpes.As we've noted before, this is a mortal issue: Infants infected with herpes face brain damage and even death.Leaders of the Orthodox Jewish community reportedly are fearful the city is looking to outlaw the ritual (used only by some Orthodox), in which blood from the circumcision is removed by direct oral suction. Others say they don't believe the circumcisers are the cause of any infections. Yet the medical evidence seems strong.More important, it makes little difference: As the Health Department says, no one who tests positive for the Herpes simplex virus should ever have oral contact with an open wound of any sort.We understand the religious-freedom (and political) sensitivities here, but community leaders 2 years ago [2015] got the city to back off by promising to ID infected mohels. As Mayor de Blasio now concedes, those leaders never kept their end of the deal. With infants' lives potentially at stake, the city can't continue to stand by. If community leaders refuse to keep their word, they'll have no cause to complain if government does exactly what they fear -- and the mayor will have no excuse for holding off[Byline: Post Editorial Board]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Most adults have been infected with herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) whether they have had a history of recurrent ulcers on the lips or not and will intermittently have HSV in their saliva even without any obvious lesions. It is during that time that the risk of transmission exists.Davis (Davis DS. Ancient rites and new laws: how should we regulate religious circumcision of minors? J Med Ethics. 2013; 39(7): 456-8) claims that between 2000 and 2011, 11 children died in New York and New Jersey following infection by herpes simplex virus, presumably from infected practitioners. But a review by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] (CDC. Neonatal herpes simplex virus infection following Jewish ritual circumcisions that included direct orogenital suction -- New York City, 2000-2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012; 61(22): 405-9) states that only 2 deaths occurred during the period, with an overall risk of the entity estimated at 1 in 4098 or 3.4 times greater than the risk among male infants considered unlikely to have had direct orogenital suction.A discussion of the issues from Israel (Gesundheit B, Grisaru-Soen G, Greenberg D, et al. Neonatal genital herpes simplex virus type 1 infection after Jewish ritual circumcision: modern medicine and religious tradition. Pediatrics. 2004; 114(2): e259-63 (<http://www.academia.edu/24186235/Neonatal_Genital_Herpes_Simplex_Virus_Type_1_Infection_After_Jewish_Ritual_Circumcision_Modern_Medicine_and_Religious_Tradition>) includes the following extract regarding the history of the subject related to infection prevention:""According to Biblical law, a male infant should be circumcised at the age of 8 days as a sign of the eternal covenant between God and the Jewish people (Genesis 17:10-14; Leviticus 12:3). According to classical rabbinical interpretation, performance of this religious ritual offers medical advantages, a view upheld by many modern medical authorities, as noted earlier. The Babylonian Talmud, the main rabbinical literature completed in the 5th century of the common era, states that for the sake of the infant, the mohel is obliged to perform the metzitzah ""so as not to bring on risk."" The nature of the risk was not specified. It specifically states that ""this procedure is performed for the sake of the infant's safety, and if a mohel does not perform the suction [of the wound], this is deemed dangerous, and he is to be dismissed."" To prevent medical complications, the Talmud permits only an experienced and responsible mohel to perform the ritual circumcision. The Talmud was aware of potential medical problems that could arise from ritual circumcision [13] and, in fact, provided the 1st description of hemophilia in the history of medicine, manifested as a familial bleeding disorder that required circumcision to be postponed [14].""In the 19th century, Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis (1818-1865) established the principles of hygiene and disease transmission [15] after neonatal tuberculosis was documented after circumcision by an infected mohel [16]. Since then, most rabbinical authorities modified their approach in response to these findings. Because the Talmudic injunction to perform metzitzah did not explicitly stipulate oral suction, more than 160 years ago, Rabbi Moses Schreiber (Pressburg, 1762-1839), a leading rabbinical authority, ruled that metzitzah could be conducted by instrumental suction [16], a ruling quickly adopted by most rabbinical authorities [17]. Consequently, the great majority of ritual circumcisions are performed today with a sterile device and not by oral suction by the mohel. However, some orthodox rabbis have felt threatened by criticism of the old religious customs and strongly resist any change in the traditional custom of oral metzitzah. The cultural process of replacing ancient customs by modern wound care has to be encouraged by a heightened awareness of this potentially life-threatening medical complication [16].""On the basis of our observations, the medico-legal impact of neonatal infection by the mohel has to be redefined. Our findings provide evidence that ritual Jewish circumcision with oral metzitzah may cause oral-genital transmission of HSV infection, resulting in clinical disease including involvement of the skin, mucous membranes, and HSV encephalitis. Furthermore, oral suction may not only endanger the child but also may expose the mohel to human immunodeficiency virus or hepatitis B from infected infants. The same consideration that led the Talmudic sages once to establish the custom of the metzitzah for the sake of the infant could now be applied to persuade the mohel to use instrumental suction.""References----------13. Preuss J. Julius Preuss' Biblical and Talmudic Medicine. Rosner F, trans-ed. New York, NY: Ktav Publishers; 1971: 375.14. Rosner F. Hemophilia in the Talmud and rabbinic writings. Ann Intern Med. 1969; 70(4): 833-7; abstract available at <http://annals.org/aim/article/683105/hemophilia-talmud-rabbinic-writings>.15. Semmelweis I, Carter K. The etiology, concept, and prophylaxis of childbed fever. In: Wisconsin Publications in the History of Science and Medicine No. 2. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press; 1983: 263.16. Katz J. Controversy over the Mezizah, the unrestricted execution of the rite of circumcision. In: Law in human hands -- case studies in Halakhic flexibility. Jerusalem, Israel: Magnes Press, Hebrew University; 1998: 357-402.17. Shields Y. The making of Metzitzah. Tradition. 1972; 13: 36-48. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/252>.]
