WHO Regional Office for Africa [edited]<http://www.afro.who.int/en/media-centre/pressreleases/item/9533-ghana-kenya-and-malawi-to-take-part-in-who-malaria-vaccine-pilot-programme.html>Ghana, Kenya and Malawi to take part in WHO malaria vaccine pilot program---------------------------------------------------------------------------The World Health Organization Regional Office for Africa (WHO/AFRO) announced today [Mon 24 Apr 2017] that Ghana, Kenya, and Malawi will take part in a WHO-coordinated pilot implementation program that will make the world's 1st malaria vaccine available in selected areas, beginning in 2018.The injectable vaccine, RTS,S, was developed to protect young children from the most deadly form of malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum. RTS,S will be assessed in the pilot program as a complementary malaria control tool that could potentially be added to the core package of WHO-recommended measures for malaria prevention.""The prospect of a malaria vaccine is great news. Information gathered in the pilot will help us make decisions on the wider use of this vaccine"", said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa. ""Combined with existing malaria interventions, such a vaccine would have the potential to save tens of thousands of lives in Africa,"" she added.Africa bears the greatest burden of malaria worldwide. Global efforts in the last 15 years have led to a 62 percent reduction in malaria deaths between 2000 and 2015, yet approximately 429 000 people died of the disease in 2015, the majority of them young children in Africa.The WHO pilot program will assess whether the vaccine's protective effect in children aged 5 - 17-months-old during Phase III testing can be replicated in real-life. Specifically, the pilot program will assess the feasibility of delivering the required 4 doses of RTS,S, the vaccine's potential role in reducing childhood deaths, and its safety in the context of routine use.WHO recommendations and RTS,S-----------------------------RTS,S was developed by GSK and is the 1st malaria vaccine to have successfully completed a Phase III clinical trial. The trial was conducted between 2009 and 2014 through a partnership involving GSK, the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative (with support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation), and a network of African research sites in 7 African countries -- including Ghana, Kenya, and Malawi.RTS,S is also the 1st malaria vaccine to have obtained a positive scientific opinion from a stringent medicines regulatory authority, the European Medicines Agency (EMA), which approved RTS,S in July 2015.In October 2015, 2 independent WHO advisory groups, comprised of the world's foremost experts on vaccines and malaria, recommended pilot implementation of RTS,S in 3 to 5 settings in sub-Saharan Africa. The recommendation came from the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization and the Malaria Policy Advisory Committee (MPAC), following a joint review of all available evidence on the vaccine's safety and efficacy. The World Health Organization formally adopted the recommendation in January 2016.Pilot implementation--------------------The 3 countries were selected to participate in the pilot based on the following criteria: high coverage of long-lasting insecticidal-treated nets (LLINs); well-functioning malaria and immunization programs, a high malaria burden even after scale-up of LLINs, and participation in the Phase III RTS,S malaria vaccine trial. Each of the 3 countries will decide on the districts and regions to be included in the pilots. High malaria burden areas will be prioritized, as this is where the benefit of the vaccine is predicted to be highest. Information garnered from the pilot will help to inform later decisions about potential wider use of the vaccine.The malaria vaccine will be administered via intramuscular injection and delivered through the routine national immunization programs. WHO is working with the 3 countries to facilitate regulatory authorization of the vaccine for use in the pilots through the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF). Regulatory support will also include measures to enable the appropriate safety monitoring of the vaccine and rigorous evaluation for eventual large scale use.Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and UNITAID, are partnering to provide USD 49.2 million for the 1st phase of the pilot program (2017-2020) which will be complemented by in-kind contributions from WHO and GSK.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The RTS,S anti-plasmodium falciparum malaria vaccine contains the circumsporozoite antigen. A number of trials have found protection between 30 percent and 50 percent measured as cumulated new parasitemias in vaccinated and control groups over 12 months. The trials have all stared with treatment clearing the enrolled children for malaria.The previous studies have not released any data on reduction in mortality from malaria. Therefore we do not know whether the new vaccine has the potential to reduce deaths from malaria. Therefore it must be assumed that the new study will provide mortality data. - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/53>, <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/174>, <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/176>.]
