M̩decins Sans Fronti̬res (MSF) [edited]<http://www.msf.org/en/article/niger-hepatitis-e-outbreak-linked-water-shortages-and-poor-sanitation>An outbreak of hepatitis E in the Diffa region of Niger highlights the water shortages and poor sanitation experienced by displaced people in the region, according to M̩decins Sans Fronti̬res (MSF), while calling for authorities and aid organizations to step up their response.Since December 2016, 135 cases of jaundice have been detected in Diffa. Jaundice, which causes a yellowing of the skin and eyes, is one of the most common symptoms of hepatitis E. Many of these cases were pregnant women admitted to the main mother and child health centre in Diffa town, where MSF works alongside the Ministry of Health; 25 of them subsequently died due to acute liver failure. Hepatitis E was finally confirmed by laboratory analysis in mid-April 2017 and the outbreak was declared by the Nigerien authorities last week [week 17 to 23 Apr 2017]. The disease is caused by the hepatitis E virus (HEV) [ribavirin has been used in chronic HEV infection - Mod.LL] and can lead to liver failure and death, with pregnant women particularly at risk. There is no specific treatment for the disease, which spreads mainly through contaminated water.""Water and sanitation activities in Diffa are clearly insufficient to meet people's needs, as we've been warning for months,"" says Elmounzer Ag Jiddou, MSF's head of mission in Niger. ""MSF is calling on the authorities and all humanitarian organisations working in Diffa to rapidly and significantly increase their response and ensure an adequate water supply and sanitation conditions.""In recent weeks, MSF teams have been working in coordination with the Ministry of Health to contain the outbreak. MSF has been helping to train health staff and providing resources and extra staff in health centres, hospitals and in the community, in order to detect new cases of the disease as early as possible, refer patients to health facilities and provide them with care. At the same time, MSF teams are conducting awareness campaigns on basic hygiene measures, such as handwashing.Some 240 000 displaced people and refugees are sheltering in the Diffa region, according to official figures. These people are particularly vulnerable after years suffering the consequences of the conflict between Boko Haram and the armies of the wider region. Of these, some 135 000 have settled in the Kitchendi, Garin Wazan and Toumour areas, where MSF teams are carrying out water and sanitation activities. So far, they have treated 105 700 litres of water to make it safe for drinking. Teams are also distributing water chlorination tablets, soap and new jerrycans to 16 800 families in these locations, and cleaning old jerrycans to make them safe for use and prevent the disease from spreading further.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This article provides some important potential insight into why there is a substantially increased maternal mortality rate related to hepatitis E virus:Kmush BL, Labrique A, Li W, et al: The association of cytokines and micronutrients with hepatitis E virus infection during pregnancy and the postpartum period in rural Bangladesh. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2016; 94(1): 203-11. Available at: <http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.15-0238>.Abstract--------""Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection is severe during pregnancy, with a pregnant case fatality rate around 30 percent. In Bangladesh, plasma samples from 1100 women during the 1st trimester (TM) and 3rd TM of pregnancy and 3 months postpartum (PP) were tested for anti-HEV IgG. During this time, 40 women developed antibody responses to HEV. These seroconverters are classified as the cases (incidence equal to 46 infections per 1000 person-years). All except 1 seroconversion occurred between the 3rd TM and 3 months PP. The cases and 40 matched non-seroconverters (controls) underwent analysis of a panel of 10 cytokines, 12 vitamins and minerals, and 2 markers of inflammation. Throughout pregnancy, seroconverting cases displayed higher concentrations of both pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines compared with the non-seroconverting controls, even prior to infection. In the 1st TM, seroconverters had lower circulating zinc concentrations (P equal 0.03), an increased prevalence of vitamin D deficiency (25-hydroxy vitamin D [25(OH)2D] less than 50 nmol/L, P equal 0.08), and anemia (hemoglobin less than 110 g/L, P equal 0.05) compared with controls. There were no differences in C-reactive protein or alpha-1-acid glycoprotein. Antecedent micronutrient deficiencies may lead to dysregulated cytokine expression and immunologic compromise, increasing the risk of HEV infection, especially during pregnancy. This exploratory analysis reveals potential novel associations that deserve further study.""Of the 4 genotypes of HEV, it seems that GT 1 and 2 are the ones that are associated with this increased mortality during gestation.Diffa is an administrative region in the southeast of Niger. The capital of the region is the city of Diffa. It can be found on a map at:<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffa_Region#/media/File:Diffa_in_Niger.svg>. - Mod.LL]
