Alsumaria News [in Arabic, trans. Mod.NS, edited]<http://bit.ly/2q1ekun>A member of the local council of Al-Baghdadi sub-district in Al-Anbar governorate, Abdul-Jabbar Al-Obeidi, revealed on [Tue 25 Apr 2017] the spread of viral hepatitis in the sub-district and called on the Ministry of Health to intervene.Al-Obeidi said in an interview with Alsumaria News that ""viral hepatitis has spread among more than 20 people in Al-Baghdadi sub-district (90 km or 56 miles west of Ramadi)."" He called on the Ministry of Health to ""intervene and send medical teams to Al-Baghdadi sub-district to detect the disease and treat the patients as there is fear that the disease will be spreading more widely among the people of the sub-district.""It is noteworthy that Al-Baghdadi sub-district is controlled by the security forces and the tribes after witnessing military operations and bombardment by the Islamic State (ISIS) during the past years.--Communicated by:ProMED-MENA<promed-mena@promedmail.org>[Both the hepatitis A and E viruses are waterborne and can occur in outbreaks. In areas of poor public health infrastructure where waterborne infections are common if outbreaks of viral hepatitis occur in adults, it is likely that the culprit is the hepatitis E virus. This is the case since, in many countries, the seroprevalence rate of hepatitis A is close to 100percent by the age of 10.The following is part of a UN Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office (<http://www.emro.who.int/irq/programmes/hepatitis.html>) report on viral hepatitis in Iraq:""In Iraq, the number of hepatitis A cases has increased from 1802 in 2009 to 4473 in 2014 among nationals. The country is a low endemicity country for hepatitis B and C. The usual mode of transmission is blood transfusions or repeated exposure to blood and its derivatives (post-transfusion non-A non-B hepatitis).For hepatitis B, 3674 cases were reported; Hepatitis C 929 cases were reported and 199 cases were reported for hepatitis E. This was due to expansion of diagnosis in district labs. In the past, diagnosis was in public health laboratory in governorates. However, since 2013 diagnosis is conducted in district laboratories. Each district has an ELISA machine for hepatitis diagnostics. The major challenge for the program is availability of funds, security situation in the country, overcrowding in the areas of migrants and refugees. The program also suffers from lack of training and capacity-building and lack of availability of diagnostic kits.The transmission of hepatitis type A and E is facilitated by poor infrastructure, poor quality of potable water, unsafe food and poor hygiene. A majority of health workers do not follow medical guidelines in dealing with blood and its derivatives, which has led to the spread of hepatitis B and C in communities. The priorities of the Ministry of Health are to establish an efficient hepatitis surveillance system, build the capacity of health personnel to manage patients, and provide medicines and diagnostic services at governorate level.""Al Anbar Governorate, or Anbar Province, is the largest governorate in Iraq by area. Encompassing much of the country's western territory, it shares borders with Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. The provincial capital is Ramadi; other important cities include Fallujah and Haditha. The name of the governorate in Persian language means ""warehouse"" or ""silo"", from the verb, anb̢shtan (to store, to warehouse). This was the last stop/warehouses on the old Silk Road toward Syria. The governorate can be found on a map at: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al_Anbar_Governorate>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/89>.]
