MedPage Today [edited]<https://www.medpagetoday.com/meetingcoverage/aan/64832>Wound botulism tied to subcutaneous injection of ""black tar"" heroin -- 1st reported 20 years ago -- appears to be problem that won't go away, with another case series published. A total of 15 cases of the condition, all of which were serious enough to require mechanical ventilation, were seen from 2005 to 2015 at the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center in El Paso in Texas, according to Ihtesham Qureshi, MBBS, and colleagues.The report also included a tip for other clinicians who might encounter the condition, which could occur anywhere that so-called ""skin popping"" is a popular way to inject heroin. Qureshi's group, reporting in a poster presented at the American Academy of Neurology (AAN) annual meeting [2017], found that nearly half of their patients had shown a normal pupillary light reflex -- thus indicating that this response ""should not be used as a finding to exclude botulism."" They also noted that early recognition of the syndrome is key to starting effective treatment. All 15 patients survived and 13 were discharged to home.The study was reported at AAN because botulism presents as a neuromuscular disorder, with visual abnormalities, limb weakness, and difficulty swallowing as common symptoms. Although most cases of botulism occur from eating contaminated food, about 25 to 30 percent begin as subdermal infections when _Clostridium botulinum_ spores are introduced under the skin. Formerly it was seen mainly in victims of traumatic crush injury, but in the past few decades it has become increasingly associated with injection drug use, either from contamination of needles or of the injected substance.Wound botulism has been a particular problem with black tar heroin, which is so named because it comes in sticky, dark chunks -- according to Qureshi's group, that is because the pure heroin is mixed with ground paper bits soaked in black shoe polish and dirt. For that reason, it can be problematic to inject intravenously, leading to alternate methods of administration including ""skin popping"", a slang term for shallow intradermal or intramuscular injection. [I am not familiar with this unique explanation of the derivation of how black tar heroin is produced, see below - Mod. LL].The first cases of wound botulism associated with injection drug use were reported in 1982. In the mid-1990s, several reports appeared tying wound botulism to injection of black tar heroin. More recently, in 2011, public health investigators in California published a 17-patient case series that specifically implicated skin popping.All of the 15 cases seen in the El Paso center involved respiratory failure. Other common symptoms included those listed above, but each of those were lacking in some patients. Beyond the neuromuscular symptoms, though, they all showed skin abscesses that tipped the treating clinicians to a possible injection-drug complication. Qureshi's group noted that black tar heroin use is especially common in southern border areas (the substance being imported mostly from Mexico), thus raising suspicion for wound botulism in cases of skin abscess combined with serious neuromuscular complaints.[Byline: John Gever]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Black tar heroin (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_tar_heroin>): ""is heroin acetate. Other forms of heroin require additional steps of purification post acetylation. With black tar the product's processing stops immediately after acetylation. Its unique consistency however is due to acetylation without a reflux apparatus. As in Homebake Heroin in Australia and New Zealand the crude acetylation results in a gooey mass. Black tar as a type holds a variable admixture morphine derivatives--predominantly 6-MAM (6-monoacetylmorphine) which is another result of crude acetylation. The lack of proper reflux during acetylation fails to remove much of the moisture retained in the acetylating agent, glacial acetic acid.""Black tar heroin is often produced in Latin America, and is most commonly found in the western and southern parts of the USA, while also being occasionally found in western Canada and Europe. It has a varying consistency depending on manufacturing methods, cutting agents, and moisture levels, ranging in quality from a black-brown tarry goo in unrefined form to a uniform, light-brown powder when further processed and cut with lactose.""People who intravenously inject black tar heroin are at higher risk of venous sclerosis than that inject powder heroin. In this condition, the veins narrow and harden, which makes repeated injection there nearly impossible. Researchers at UC-San Francisco have found that the rapidity with which black tar heroin destroys veins, along with its gummier consistency, may put people who inject it at a lower risk of HIV infection because they may be forced to inject subcutaneously (rather than into veins), and needles must be thoroughly rinsed free of 'black tar' between injections if new sterilized ones are not available.""The presence of 6-monoacetylcodeine found in tar heroin has not been tested in humans but has been shown to be toxic alone and more toxic when mixed with mono- or di- acetyl morphine potentially making tar more toxic than refined diamorphine. At least 1 study has drawn attention to lower rates of HIV infection amongst drug injectors in which black tar heroin is the major form of street-available heroin, suggesting that this may be due to the need to heat black tar heroin to dissolve it (which also inactivates any HIV present in the solution).""However, black tar heroin injectors can be at increased risk of life-threatening bacterial infections, in particular necrotizing soft tissue infection. The practice of ""skin-popping"" or subcutaneous injection predisposes to necrotizing fasciitis or necrotizing cellulitis from _Clostridium perfringens_, while deep intramuscular injection predisposes to necrotizing myositis. Tar heroin injection can also be associated with _Clostridium botulinum_ infection."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/245>.]
