The Hindu [edited<http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-kerala/diphtheria-cases-prompt-rethink-on-immunisation-strategy/article18263140.ece>The resurfacing of 2 diphtheria cases in [Malappuram] district has not only shocked health authorities but also made them believe that there is much more to be done in their immunization drive. The District Medical Office is up for a rethink on the strategy being followed in combating some preventable diseases, including diphtheria.""We ought to adopt a different strategy in the light of our failure in reaching out to our target groups,"" said District Medical Officer K Sakeena. She has convened a meeting of officials on [Fri 28 Apr 2017], to discuss if fresh plans were needed to cover the un-immunized sections that have been resisting vaccination in the district. Both the cases of diphtheria, being treated at Government Medical College Hospital, Kozhikode [Kerala], were said to be the result of lack of immunization. One of them is an adult woman from Thuvvoor [Malappuram district], the other is a 3.5-year-old boy of a migrant family. The confirmation of diphtheria in the Assamese boy has posed fresh worries to the authorities. ""So far, we have not bothered about migrant people. Now this has become a real issue,"" Dr Sakeena said.The health authorities have failed to inflict any serious damage to the anti-immunization bloc in the district in spite of their intensive campaigns, including the ongoing Mission Indradhanush [a government of India initiative to ensure full immunisation of all children in India]. Although the Health Department could bring in an increased number of children under the immunisation cover, the resistance groups too have grown stronger. Those groups resisting immunisation have been using the social media, particularly WhatsApp, to reach out regularly to their targeted audiences. People who have not immunized their children for various reasons are being bombarded with anti-immunization propaganda on a daily basis. ""We hardly get a chance to communicate with them individually to convince them,"" Dr Sakeena said.She said young fathers who are the decision-makers in many families would be focused in the next phase of the awareness campaign. ""Educating women alone will not help. Men should also be aware of the importance of immunization,"" she said.[Byline Abdul Latheef Naha]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Maps of India can be seen at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6586>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]******[2]Date: Fri 28 Apr 2017Source: The Lancet journal [edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(17)31069-3.pdf>Ref: Vargha D, Greene JA: Grey-market medicines: diphtheria antitoxin and the decay of biomedical infrastructure. The Lancet 2017; 389(10080): 1690-1; doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31069-3----------------------------------------------------------------------More so than most of its European neighbours, Spain at the turn of the 21st century thought it had relegated diphtheria to the past: the country had not seen a case of diphtheria since 1986. Not, that is, until a 6-year old boy was diagnosed with the disease in May 2015. Although diphtheria has been a curable disease since the development of diphtheria antitoxin (DAT) in the 1890s and its widespread manufacture in the early 20th century, scarcely a month after his diagnosis, the child succumbed to this disease thought to have been largely tamed by modern medical science. 10 months later, a 2nd child in Belgium perished after contracting diphtheria. Diphtheria is a treatable disease, but the window from 1st symptoms to irreversible damage is short, and delay in treatment can diminish chances of survival. With physicians rarely encountering the disease that today causes less than 5000 cases annually worldwide, and DAT stocks being low or non-existent, these two cases point towards a larger question: what happens to an essential medicine after the epidemic it treats has passed?Although it is on WHO's Essential Medicines list, neither Spain nor Belgium had stockpiles of DAT on hand when these cases hit. Both countries had to reach out to EU member states and WHO to locate supplies of DAT. Ironically, it was the very successes with diphtheria prevention that had eroded the market for DAT in Europe and North America--and with it, the availability of treatment. In Europe, the international concern sparked by the death of the 2 children is reminiscent of an earlier set of outbreaks, at the end of the Cold War. European states received a stark reminder of the ferocity of diphtheria when, in the early 1990s, news of outbreaks started emerging from countries of the former Soviet Union. Political turmoil in these states brought a rise in anti-vaccination sentiments, disruption of health services, including immunisation programmes, and a mass movement of people. Between 1990 and 1998, the 157‰Ûö000 cases (including 5000 deaths) in Russia and in the Newly Independent States accounted for more than 80 percent of diphtheria cases worldwide.The epidemic put into motion institutional frameworks in Europe: the foundations of a diphtheria surveillance network, now operating under European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Despite the stark contrast between low case fatality rates in Russia, where DAT was readily available, and high ones in the Newly Independent States, where it was not, most of the scientific discussion after the outbreak focused on prevention, with little attention paid to maintaining access to the antitoxin.The post-Soviet experience is instructive. What had been a country with solid health surveillance and high vaccination rates for decades quickly became a site of a severe epidemic. The outbreak in countries of the former Soviet Union brings to focus the frailty of public health systems in the face of political breakdown, and the force and speed with which long-forgotten diseases can re-emerge in such contexts.In the rest of Europe incidence of diphtheria remained low and vaccination coverage remained high in the decades since the post-Soviet outbreak. This sustained absence of the disease has had effects on industry interest in antitoxin production. In the early 20th century a host of national institutions and private companies competed to produce DAT, but in the second half of the century sites of production dwindled to a handful of countries. By the mid-2010s pharmaceutical companies and state institutions in Europe ceased DAT production, with Bulgaria remaining the only manufacturer for mostly an internal, national market. Today the continent is left without continuous access to DAT produced in Europe. The global production of DAT now maps onto countries where the disease is still, or until recently had been, endemic: Instituto Butantan in Brazil, some Indian companies, and Mikrogen in Russia.The US public health system has turned to a different approach. The perils of contracting diphtheria after it receded from daily life in the USA became visible after the 2003 death of a 63-year-old unvaccinated Pennsylvanian man who returned from a week-long church-building trip to Haiti with a sore throat. After receiving DAT 9 days into his illness, he died. Just 6 years earlier, the CDC had announced that Connaught Laboratories, the last remaining supplier of DAT to the US market, had ceased production, with the last batch due to expire in January, 1997. A temporising solution was arranged with the FDA to make limited quantities of unapproved antitoxin, produced by the then French firm Pasteur MÌ©rieux, available through a network of US Public Health Service quarantine stations associated with the CDC. By 2003, Pasteur MÌ©rieux stopped production of DAT as well, and no other manufacturer had applied for US licensure of a DAT product. In turn, the CDC extended its arrangement with the FDA to include another unapproved version of antitoxin (marketed by the Instituto Butantan in Brazil) as an ""Investigational New Drug"" which the CDC keeps stockpiled with 24-h emergency service for release in the case of emergency.Physicians in the USA are assured access to DAT when needed. Since 2003, there have been 33 administrations of DAT in the USA and no further known deaths from diphtheria. Yet trouble looms on the horizon, as licensing problems have interrupted production and stockpiles age.It is worth pausing to consider the historical contortions necessary to reframe DAT as an ""investigational new drug"" in the 21st century. Yet this twist is only one of many ways in which old drugs can become new again, and often newly inaccessible. Recent years have seen many older essential drugs, whose patents long ago expired and whose US markets have dwindled, as with the antiparasitic drugs albendazole and pyrimethamine rebranded as expensive monopoly drugs under the brand names Albenza and Daraprim, respectively. Although DAT in the USA has not been subject to analogous price-gouging, these cases collectively underscore the hazards of assuming that--after an epidemic recedes--the older effective medicines that helped to keep it at bay will simply remain cheap and available as part of a clinical and public health armamentarium.The success of prevention can result in costs for those individuals who still contract a disease. This is due not only to changes in pharmaceutical markets, but also to the paradoxical effect of successful prevention programmes on the practice of diagnosis. In Belgium and Spain, delay in treatment owed less to the days that it took for the nations to request DAT from EU member states, than to the time from initial presentation to positive diagnosis of a disease thought long-departed from Europe.In the past 50 years, with the exception of a handful of countries, diphtheria like many other vaccine-preventable diseases moved from being a complex disease that doctors could easily recognise in clinical practice, into an object of the microbiological past--used to make a teaching point and show biomedical progress and the importance of compulsory vaccination. Reinforced by low incidence rates and high vaccination coverage, this understanding of the disease perpetuates policies that, by the turn of the 21st century, focused almost exclusively on epidemic surveillance and immunisation. As a result, when cases of diphtheria do occur in Europe or the USA, they tend to be diagnosed too late for treatment to be effective even if it were available.The unavailability of older therapeutics further compounds the problem. While the scarcity of DAT in the global North highlights the problems of states' reliance on private pharmaceutical markets to maintain access to essential medications, it has little to do with the usual problems of pricing and poverty. Rather, conversations today at the ECDC and WHO Europe about DAT availability are eerily similar to those on iron lungs over 60 years ago. As with DAT, the use of this life-saving equipment was understood to be time sensitive: lack of access could result in preventable death. In the wake of the polio epidemics, the unavailability of iron lungs prompted WHO to begin planning an international solution from 1948 onwards. After years of debates over determining the overall European stockpile of machines and their locations, it was the then League of Red Cross Societies that was able to put into place an international lending system that reached far beyond the borders of Europe. Despite a similar urgency, but without such an emergency in diphtheria treatment, there are no clear data on current European DAT stockpiles, and plans for international coordination or a common European stockpile have yielded little result.The shifting geography of the disease complicates both our understanding of diphtheria as a disease of the past and current management of diphtheria treatment. The unavailability of DAT in the global North turns many conventional assumptions of global health supply chains on their heads. It is the global North that becomes the locale for scarcity, as Europe and the USA look to Brazil and India for crucial public health assistance when they require DAT.To return to the question we started with: what happens to an essential medicine after the epidemic has passed? With no market in the global North to induce pharmaceutical firms to develop newer versions of DAT or to continue older forms of production, the global supply of this life-saving therapeutic will continue to dwindle. This story of diphtheria leaves us with a paradoxical relationship between time and space, historicity and endemicity, in which progress in prevention presents new problems for treatment. Without sustained attention from WHO and cooperation among its member states, we might in future face a struggle to keep children from dying from a disease that has been treatable since 1890.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3]Date: Wed 26 Apr 2017Source: Stat News [edited]<https://www.statnews.com/2017/04/26/diphtheria-new-treatment/>It's a tragedy whenever a child dies needlessly of a disease that is both preventable and treatable. Sadly, that happens daily around the globe, due mainly to a raft of infectious diseases. One of these is diphtheria. It is still a killer mainly because the treatment for it is no longer made and stockpiles of it are aging and dwindling.Highly contagious and particularly deadly among children under age 5, the name of the disease comes from the Greek word for ""leather hide,"" a reference to the gray, leather-like coating that the toxin generated by the diphtheria bacterium leaves behind in the nose and throat. Within a few days, the disease can suffocate a child. In the USA, diphtheria was once a leading cause of childhood deaths. The discovery of an antitoxin derived from horse serum at the end of the 19th century, followed by the widespread vaccination of infants against diphtheria in the 20th century, helped to erase it as a common disease here and in other developed countries.But diphtheria hasn't been defeated. In 2015, more than 4500 cases of it were reported to the WHO. The bacterium continues to circulate even among immunized populations. Most diphtheria outbreaks occur in poor countries in Africa, the Middle East, and Asia where vaccination is not universal or complete. But cases can, and do, occur anywhere public health is disrupted by natural disasters or conflicts, as has happened recently in Haiti, Syria, and the Ukraine. European doctors have been shocked to see cases of diphtheria among migrants from African and Middle Eastern countries.They have been even more shocked to learn that the antitoxin is no longer manufactured, that the stockpile of it is shrinking, and that it often can't be delivered in time to save a sick child. International health leaders, monitoring the upheavals occurring around the globe, say that the need for a reliable supply of the diphtheria antitoxin is dire. Some have compared the world's lack of preparedness for diphtheria outbreaks to walking into a storm.MassBiologics, a nonprofit unit of the University of Massachusetts Medical School that I lead, has been at the forefront of diphtheria treatment since 1894, when the organization was created specifically to produce the newly-discovered diphtheria antitoxin, which saved the lives of thousands of children in Massachusetts and beyond. The antitoxin was made by extracting blood from horses exposed to small amounts of diphtheria toxin. Once vaccination helped prevent the disease, demand for the equine antitoxin began falling steadily. The number of companies willing to make the antitoxin dwindled; today, none distribute it internationally.Research teams at MassBiologics have identified a much safer human antibody to diphtheria toxin. Instead of making it by bleeding horses kept in stables, we use cell cultures to produce this antibody consistently and cleanly in sterilized steel tanks. Preclinical testing has proven that our antibody neutralizes the diphtheria toxin.Our next step is to generate enough of it for a Phase 1 clinical trial in humans that will validate its dosage and safety. This week [25-27 Apr 2017], officials from the WHO and the CDC will report on this potential advance at a strategic advisory meeting in Geneva. Public health ministers in places like the Dominican Republic, where spillover cases from Haiti have been threatening public health, have been pleading for diphtheria antitoxin. The unnecessary shortage of this treatment exposes a widespread and troubling gap in the global public health community: the lack of a coordinated, strategic, and modern approach to address diseases that lack commercial incentives for production.Of course, even promising vaccines and preventive therapies such as a diphtheria antitoxin face innumerable challenges during the years it takes to move from the lab to patients, often because their potential markets are too small to encourage private investment and the countries where they are needed don't have resources to fund research or buy the necessary doses. Clearly, the world needs new vehicles to develop drugs for infectious diseases. The recently launched Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations -- a partnership among governments, foundations, pharmaceutical companies, and academic research centers -- may be one solution. Although it will initially focus on developing vaccines for the most urgent epidemic threats, its model could eventually encompass other medical interventions.Diphtheria is an old disease, a terrible disease, and one for which we believe there's an effective new treatment at hand -- if only we can liberate it from our freezer and put it into the hands of doctors around the world..[Byline: Mark Klempner]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The commentaries that follow the posting with confirmation of a 2nd case of diphtheria in Malappuram district, Kerala, India, underscore the need for not only the availability and use of the diphtheria toxoid vaccine but also the ready availability of a humanized diphtheria anti-toxin. A photograph of a diphtheritic membrane can be seen at <http://www.theayurveda.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Diphtheria-infection.jpg>.The following is a bit history of the delivery of diphtheria antitoxin which is celebrated by the Alaskan Iditarod dog mushing race yearly <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iditarod_Trail_Sled_Dog_Race>:""The most famous event in the history of Alaskan mushing is the 1925 serum run to Nome, also known as the ""Great Race of Mercy."" A large diphtheria epidemic threatened Nome, and Nome's supply of antitoxin had expired and doctor Curtis Welch refused to use it, and then proceeded to send out telegrams looking for a fresh supply of antitoxin. The nearest antitoxin was found to be in Anchorage, nearly [500] miles [805 km] away. The only way to get the antitoxin to Nome was by sled dog, due to unusable planes and ships. Governor Scott Bone approved a safe route and the 20-pound (9.1 kg) cylinder of serum was sent by train 298 miles (480 km) from the southern port of Seward to Nenana, where it was passed just before midnight on [27 Jan 1925] to the 1st of 20 mushers and more than 100 dogs who relayed the package 674 miles (1085 km) from Nenana to Nome. The dogs ran in relays, with no dog running over 100 miles (160 km).The Norwegian Gunnar Kaasen and his lead dog Balto arrived on Front Street in Nome on [2 Feb 1925] at 5:30 am, just [5.5] days later. The 2 became media celebrities, and a statue of Balto was erected in Central Park in New York City in 1925, where it has become one of the most popular tourist attractions. However, most mushers consider Leonhard Seppala and his lead dog Togo to be the true heroes of the run. Together they covered the most hazardous stretch of the route, and carried the serum 91 miles [146.5 km], the single farthest of any team.In 1964 the Wasilla-Knik Centennial Committee was created to honor the 100th anniversary of Alaska's induction into the United States of America from Russia. Dorothy G Page, the chairmen of the committee, had the original idea to race a portion of the Iditarod Trail. Joe Redington Sr (named the ""Father of the Iditarod"" by one of the local newspapers), and his wife Vi were Page's first true support and, with volunteer support they cleared up a portion of the trail. The 1st race, known as the Iditarod Trail Seppala Memorial Race in honor of Leonhard Seppala, was held in 1967. The purse of USD 25 000 attracted a field of 58 racers, and the winner was Isaac Okleasik.""Mod.LL]
