Micro Syria [in Arabic, trans. & summ. Mod.NS, edited]<http://bit.ly/2ppTFCw>The epidemiological monitoring team in Tafas town, in the western countryside of Dara'a, has launched an awareness campaign on viral hepatitis during the past few days. The campaign is implemented within a comprehensive health program that includes awareness about the symptoms of diseases such as hepatitis. The campaign has come after recording more than 50 cases of viral hepatitis in the town in less than a month, in light of the inability of the field hospitals to deal with the disease and the lack of support provided to them.The campaign targeted all the residents of Tafas town and included different activities such as awareness lectures, distribution of brochures, and the visit of mobile teams to homes.Mohammed Al-Zoubi, a nurse and a participant in the epidemiological monitoring campaign, confirmed that the contamination of irrigation water in the city of Tafas, due to leakage in the sewage line in some sections of Al-Thawra water line, has led to mixing of sewage water with irrigation water in the town. This has increased the presence of contaminated agricultural products in the market, resulting in the spread of viral hepatitis.Al-Zoubi pointed out that the activities of the epidemiological monitoring team include distribution of chlorine for drinking water tanks, informing people about the importance of performing medical checkup when there is doubt about the presence of the disease in an individual and educating people about the ways of transmission of infection. They also include educating people regarding how to deal with a patient and the prevention measures.Dr Mohamed Al-Bardan said that ""there are many reasons for the spread of the infection other than contamination of the irrigation water, including poor personal hygiene because of poverty and displacement."" He pointed out that ""the control measures include the provision of chlorine and pumping it through the drinking water network, water tankers, agricultural wells, and providing cleaning materials to all families that are unable to obtain or purchase them.""Mansour Al-Bardan, head of the local council in Tafas town, said that ""the council has established an emergency room to analyze the water of wells and distribute chlorine on them, visit houses and check drinking water, and distribute chlorine to the people."" He added that ""the local council has issued instructions to the people about how to deal with the patients, and the methods of sterilizing drinking water, through publications distributed in the town.""Viral hepatitis is widely spread in several areas of Dara'a, particularly in Tafas town in the western countryside of the governorate. The number of cases has reached 62, amid alerts and warnings from the medical centers of the rapid spread of the disease, in light of the inability to control the causes of its spread, and to early detect the disease.--Communicated by:ProMED-MENA<promed@promedmail.org>[Serological information confirming the cause of these illnesses is needed. Both the hepatitis A and E viruses are waterborne and can occur in outbreaks. In areas of poor public health infrastructure where waterborne infections are common if outbreaks of viral hepatitis occur in adults, it is likely that the culprit is the hepatitis E virus. This is the case since, in many countries, the seroprevalence rate of hepatitis A is close to 100 percent by the age of 10.The location of the Dara'a governorate in southwest Syria, bordering on northern Jordan can be found at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daraa_Governorate>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/25336>.]
