Los Angeles Times [edited]<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-deer-antler-tea-botulism-20170428-story.html>Tea made from deer antlers may have sickened 2 Orange County residents with botulism, a serious illness caused by a [toxin produced by a] bacterium that can cause paralysis, breathing difficulty and is potentially deadly. One adult has a confirmed case of botulism, and the other has a suspected case, the Orange County Health Care Agency said [Fri 28 Apr 2017]. An investigation by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health suggests the botulism illnesses may be connected with drinking deer antler tea obtained in March 2017.Health officials said anyone who purchased products in March 2017 should dispose of them.Botulism is an illness caused by a toxin made by a bacterium. Symptoms of the illness include: - weakness - double vision - blurred vision - drooping eyelids - slurred speech - difficulty swallowing - dry mouth - muscle weakness.Without medical attention, a person with botulism can begin to suffer paralysis of the respiratory muscles, arms, leg and trunk. In severe cases, patients may need to be hooked up to a machine to help them breathe for weeks or months. Illness generally begins between 18 to 36 hours after consuming the contaminated food or beverage, but symptoms can begin to show up as soon as 6 hours to as long as 10 days later. The CDC says anyone with symptoms that suggest botulism should speak to a healthcare provider or go to the emergency room. An antitoxin is available that can prevent worsening of paralysis if administered before paralysis is complete.Survivors of botulism poisoning can suffer from fatigue and shortness of breath for years and may need long-term therapy, according to the CDC. In rare cases, botulism can cause death from respiratory failure, or from infections or other complications related to paralysis.Public health officials consider a single case of botulism a public health emergency, because it might foretell a larger outbreak, according to the CDC.The largest US botulism outbreak in 40 years struck in 2015, caused by potatoes in a salad that were improperly canned at home and served at a church potluck in Ohio's Fairfield County, just east of Columbus. One person died of respiratory failure after arriving at the emergency room. Of the 77 people who ate at the potluck, 25 were confirmed to have contracted botulism, and 4 more probably had the illness. The CDC had to rush doses of the antitoxin from its Strategic National Stockpile to Ohio so the patients could be treated. The CDC determined that the person who prepared the potato salad used a boiling water canner that does not kill spores of the bacterium that causes botulism. A pressure canner, on the other hand, does eliminate the spores. The canned potatoes also were not heated after removal from the can, which would have killed the toxin.[Byline: Rong-Gong Lin II]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[A photograph of the package can be found on the original URL.It is likely that the deer antler product is actually deer velvet antler.Velvet antler (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velvet_antler>) ""is used as a drug in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) that classifies many similar substances from a variety of species under the simplified Chinese name pinyin Lu Rong and the pharmaceutical name Cervi Cornu Pantorichum. The 2 common species used within the TCM system are Sika Deer and Red Deer. Within the TCM system it is prescribed by a doctor to a patient in the use to treat yang deficiency syndromes. In Asia, velvet antler is dried and sold as slices or powdered. The powder or slices are then boiled in water, usually with other herbs and ingredients, and consumed as a medicinal soup.Velvet antler in the form of deer antler spray has been at the center of multiple controversies with professional sports leagues and famous athletes allegedly using it for injury recovery and performance enhancement purposes. In mid-2011 a National Football League (NFL) player successfully sued a deer antler velvet spray manufacturer for testing positive for methyltestosterone in 2009 for a total amount of 5.4 million.[19][20] In August 2011, Major League Baseball (MLB) added deer antler spray to their list of prohibited items because it contains ""potentially contaminated nutritional supplements.""On January 30, 2013, a professional PGA Tour golfer was caught unaware and openly admitted to the personal use of deer antler spray which contained a banned substance at the time. A week later the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) lifted the ban on deer antler spray, but with urgency, ""Deer Antler Velvet Spray may contain IGF-1 (Insulin-like Growth Factor -1) and WADA recommends therefore that athletes be extremely vigilant with this supplement because it could lead to a positive test."" The consensus opinion of leading endocrinologists concerning any purported claims and benefits ""is simply that there is far too little of the substance in even the purest forms of the spray to make any difference,"" and ""there is no medically valid way to deliver IGF-1 orally or in a spray."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
