Rochester (NY) Democrat and Chronicle [edited]<http://www.democratandchronicle.com/story/news/2017/04/28/superbug-fungus-patient-died-rochester-general-hospital/101017882/>A local patient infected with a ""superbug"" fungus died from ""complex medical issues"" several weeks after coming to Rochester General Hospital, according to Rochester Regional Health. The patient, a New York City resident, died in March 2017, said Veronica Chiesi Brown, medical relations specialist for Rochester Regional Health, which oversees the hospital.First identified in Japan in 2009, the fungus has spread to more than a dozen countries. The oldest of the 66 cases reported in the USA dates back to 2013, but most were reported in 2016, with many in New York and New Jersey.The fungus is called _Candida auris_. Scientists say it can be hard to identify with standard lab tests. American health officials sounded alarms last year [2016] because 2 of the 3 kinds of commonly used antifungal drugs have little effect. Most vulnerable are fragile hospital patients, particularly newborns and the elderly. It tends to be diagnosed in patients after they've been in hospitals for several weeks. The fungus can infect wounds, ears and the bloodstream.The local patient initially arrived at RGH with symptoms of sepsis, so ""right away, doctors knew the patient had some sort of infection,"" Brown said. The patient also had a complex medical history, she said. A lab technician noticed signs of _Candida auris_ in the patient's cultures. Once the infection was identified and confirmed, the patient (who at 1st had a roommate) was isolated. The roommate also was quarantined and did not contract the infection, Brown said. The initial patient died several weeks later.""There's absolutely no health concern for the public at Rochester General,"" Brown said. ""The hospital is safe, and the case was limited to that one patient, as the infection existed just inside that patient.""[Byline: Victoria E. Freile]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This organism is resistant to the polyene and imidazole classes of antifungal agents but are sensitive (so far) to the echinocandin type of drug. There are 3 FDA licensed echinocandins, caspofungin (Cancidas), anidulafungin (Eraxis) and micafungin (Micamine). Unlike the commonly used imidazole group, the echinocandinins are not bioavailable by the oral route due to poor absorption and must be given by the intravenous route.For those interested, the echinocandins (<http://www.antimicrobe.org/d35.asp>) are a class of semisynthetic antifungal lipopeptides that are structurally characterized by a cyclic hexapeptide core linked to variably configured lipid side chains. These drugs inhibit glucan synthase, the enzyme responsible for synthesis of beta 1-3 linked glucan, a major polysaccharide component of the cell wall of several pathogenic fungi. The beta 1-3 glucan synthase complex is composed of 2 subunits: a plasma membrane-bound catalytic subunit (FKS) and an activating subunit. The activating subunit, with guanosine triphosphatase activity, activates the catalytic subunit, which polymerizes UDP-glucose into fibrils of glucan and extrudes the polymer through the plasma membrane into the cell wall. Inhibition is thought to be non-competitive, but the precise mechanism by which these drugs interact with the enzyme complex to inhibit synthesis of glucan is not well defined.The spread of polymicrobial-resistant pathogens, whether bacterial, fungal, or otherwise, is facilitated by a combination of overuse of antimicrobials and inadequacy of infection prevention. Spreading from country to country, state to state, or city to city can occur, and does occur, as in this case, by patient movement. Spread from patient-to-patient is a happenstance of contaminated fomites or on the hands of health care personnel. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/234>.]
