Metro Libre, PanamÌÁ [in Spanish, machine trans. edited]<http://metrolibre.com/nacionales/muerte-de-menores-fue-por-picadura-de-garrapata-8df>The health authorities of Panama confirmed today, 3 Apr 2017, the deaths of 2 children due to rickettsiosis, a tick-borne disease that is very rare in the country. ""At first, it was thought that it could be a serious dengue. The studies and the tests of dengue were negative,"" local health director of the Ministry of Health (Minsa) Itza Barahona explained on local television.One of the minors was 8 years old and lived in El Valle de AntÌ n, a mountainous town in the interior that belongs to the province of CoclÌ© and is located 250 km west of the Panamanian capital. The other, 15, resided in the Don Bosco neighborhood, located just outside the capital and belonging to the district of Juan Diaz, said the official on the TVN channel.Both victims, added Barahona, had the same symptoms: high fever, muscle aches and rash. The Director of Health wanted to reassure the population and said that rickettsiosis is a disease for which there are antibiotics and which has ""very low prevalence in Panama,"" and is transmitted by ticks living in rural areas and not in urban areas.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The Rocky Mountain spotted fever rickettsia, _Rickettsia rickettsii_, is the likely cause of these illnesses, which is also referred to as febre maculosa, Sao Paulo exanthematic typhus, Minas Gerais exanthematic typhus, and Brazilian spotted fever. The organism, which is tick-borne, is distributed throughout much of the USA, including the Rocky Mountains, and parts of southern Canada, Central, and South America.It cannot be stressed enough that early recognition of this disease is quite important in minimizing morbidity and mortality. This is especially true in areas where the infection is not as classically known. The incubation period of the disease is about a week after the tick exposure, long after the tick has detached. The presenting illness is generally nonspecific, with fever, muscle pains, and headache (the headache is usually described as quite severe). The rash begins in day 3 of illness, initially maculopapular (an area that is red and has small, confluent bumps) at the wrists and ankles, before becoming petechial (red or purple spots caused by minor hemorrhage) and purpuric (purple spots) involving the palms and soles, as well as spreading proximally to the trunk. Purpurae usually are not seen before the 6th day of illness. The mortality is indeed quite low if treatment (usually a tetracycline) is begun during the 1st 2 days of the rash or before.Empiric treatment for this infection should always be started in people with compatible symptoms inhabiting endemic areas during the spring and summer, even if no tick bite is known.This paper, from Panama, underscores that the infection does occur in the Central American nation, albeit infrequently:Tribaldos M, Zaldivar Y, Bermudez S, et al: Rocky Mountain spotted fever in Panama: a cluster description. J Infect Dev Ctries 2011; 5: 737-741.Abstract:""Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is a tick-borne infection caused by _Rickettsia rickettsii_. We report a cluster of fatal cases of RMSF in 2007 in Panama, involving a pregnant woman and 2 children from the same family. The woman presented with a fever followed by respiratory distress, maculopapular rash, and an eschar at the site from which a tick had been removed. She died 4 days after disease onset. This is the 2nd published report of an eschar in a patient confirmed by PCR to be infected with _R. rickettsia_. One month later, the children presented within days of one another with fever and rash and died 3 and 4 days after disease onset. The diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemistry, PCR and sequencing of the genes of _R. rickettsii_ in tissues obtained at autopsy.""Eschars at the site of the infected tick bite are quite uncommon in RMSF but do occur at the inoculation site of other rickettsial infections, including Mediterranean tick typhus, African tick typhus, scrub typhus, and _Rickettsia parkeri_ rickettsiosis and rickettsialpox in the USA. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/18>.]
