Daily Nation [edited]<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/Scientist-warns-drug-resistant-typhoid-strain-/1056-3909336-fndm6n/>Poor lab capability and surveillance and lack of sanitation are enabling the spread of a typhoid strain that is resistant to drugs, a researcher has warned.Prof. Sam Kariuki, head of microbiology at Kenya Medical Research Institute, said that H58, whose origins can be traced to the Nepalese capital, Kathmandu, is now in East Africa.H58, an older strain of typhoid causing _Salmonella_ Typhi, has edged out other strains to become resistant to more than 60 per cent of locally available and affordable antimicrobials. Laboratories are required to detect it from the other strains found in East and Central Africa. H58 is potentially fatal because it causes intestinal perforations.In an interview with the Nation, Prof. Kariuki said drug resistance was burdening the health system. ""If a disease is not responding to 1st-line drugs that are cheap, clinicians have to prescribe 2nd and 3rd lines,"" he said. Prof. Kariuki raised the concern during a media round table organised by World Animal Protection to discuss the threat of antimicrobial resistance in Kenya.One can get typhoid from contaminated water or food. Carriers pass the germs in their feces and urine. Its symptoms include chills, headaches, stomach aches and constipation. Due to low suspicion index amongst health workers, the disease is usually misdiagnosed, since its symptoms are similar to those of other illnesses common in Africa.The professor's concerns come 2 weeks after researchers at the 10th international conference on typhoid in Kampala, Uganda also discussed the issue. ""With the increase of slums, which have poor sanitation, these cases are bound to go up,"" the microbiologist said. The country has reported sporadic outbreaks of typhoid, with isolated cases of drug resistant strains. In fact, Kenya is classified as hyper-epidemic for typhoid, meaning it records many cases that could result in deaths.H58 has also been found in Mukuru Kwa Njenga slum, Nairobi.Last year [2016], a genetic study of _Salmonella_ Typhi analysed the DNA of more than 2000 typhoid pathogens from Africa and Asia. According to the report published in the journal Nature Genetics, H58 left Asia and came to Africa in the last 30 years. It landed in Kenya about a decade ago.[Byline: Verah Okeyo]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Clearly, this strain of _S._ Typhi, H58, defined based on single nucleotide polymorphisms, frequently called SNPs (pronounced ""snips""), is accounting for a significant amount of morbidity and mortality, which may be based on its increasingly antimicrobial resistance.The following is abstracted from the introduction of the article, Wong VK, Baker S, Pickard DJ, et al: Phylogeographical analysis of the dominant multidrug-resistant H58 clade of _Salmonella_ Typhi identifies inter- and intracontinental transmission events. Nature Genetics. 2015;47:632-639 with the citations removed:""_S._ Typhi, the primary global cause of human typhoid (enteric fever), is a monophyletic serovar of _S. enterica_. Unlike many Salmonella, _S. Typhi_ are highly restricted to infection of humans and are associated with systemic infection, prolonged fever and an asymptomatic carrier state. Typhoid is still a common disease in many regions of the world with poor infrastructure and limited economic development and is also a risk for travelers who visit such regions. It is estimated that 20-30 million cases of typhoid occur annually, although deaths are less frequently reported than before the availability of effective antimicrobials.In addition to improvements in access to clean water and sanitation, typhoid can potentially be controlled by other interventions such as vaccination and antimicrobial therapy. Chloramphenicol, ampicillin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole were traditional first-line drugs commonly used to treat acute typhoid, and these agents continue to be used in areas of the world where _S._ Typhi are deemed susceptible. However, since the 1970s, _S._ Typhi have emerged that display multidrug resistance, defined as resistance to the above antimicrobials, compromising treatment. Since the 1990s, alternative treatment options have included fluoroquinolones, 3rd-generation cephalosporins (such as ceftriaxone) and the azalide azithromycin. The early emergence of MDR _S._ Typhi was driven in large part by the acquisition of IncHI1 plasmids carrying antibiotic resistance genes and, more recently, by chromosomal mutations associated with resistance to fluoroquinolones, and MDR strains have been reported across Asia and Africa.Phylogenetic analysis, initially based on subgenomic DNA sequences but later on whole-genome DNA sequences, showed that the global _S._ Typhi population is highly clonal and likely originated from a common ancestor that moved into the human population several thousand years ago. It also indicated that the population is relatively small and that recombination between _S._ Typhi and other salmonellae is rare. Simple SNP-based typing schemes have been developed that stratify the _S._ Typhi population into haplotypes, and these schemes are now used to unequivocally map new isolates to the phylogeny. Notably, this approach identified a single emerging, highly clonal MDR haplotype of _S._ Typhi, H58, which is being reported with increasing frequency from many countries in Africa and Asia. Within the H58 lineage, IncHI1 MDR plasmids of the restricted subtype PST6 and chromosomal point mutations conferring quinolone resistance are common."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/174>.]
