Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/dengue-vaccine-takeda-enrolls-20000-children-adolescents-phase-3-trial-91801/>Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited announced this week that it has completed enrolment of 20 100 children and adolescents ages 4 through 16 in its global, pivotal Phase 3 Tetravalent Immunization against Dengue Efficacy Study (TIDES) trial, a double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled study designed to evaluate the efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of its live-attenuated tetravalent dengue vaccine candidate (TAK-003). Takeda initiated the TIDES trial, the largest vaccine clinical trial for Takeda to date, in September 2016 and completed enrolment in less than 7 months. The study is taking place in 8 dengue-endemic countries in Latin America and Asia: Brazil, Colombia, Panama, Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, Philippines, Thailand and Sri Lanka. While dengue can affect people of all ages, it is a leading cause of serious illness among children in some countries in Latin America and Asia. The enrollment of children and adolescents between the ages of 4 and 16 years underscores the significant burden of dengue disease across the entire pediatric age range. Initial results of the TIDES trial are expected in 2018.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is going to be interesting to see if there is a robust immune response to all 4 DENV serotypes following administration of this vaccine. - Mod. TY]******[3] Platelet predictor of DSSDate: Thu 27 Apr 2017Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005498>Abstract--------BackgroundDengue is the most important mosquitoborne viral infection to affect humans. Although it usually manifests as a self-limited febrile illness, complications may occur as the fever subsides. A systemic vascular leak syndrome that sometimes progresses to life-threatening hypovolaemic shock is the most serious complication seen in children, typically accompanied by haemoconcentration and thrombocytopenia. Robust evidence on risk factors, especially features present early in the illness course, for progression to dengue shock syndrome (DSS) is lacking. Moreover, the potential value of incorporating serial haematocrit and platelet measurements in prediction models has never been assessed.Methodology/principal findingsWe analyzed data from a prospective observational study of Vietnamese children aged 5-15 years admitted with clinically suspected dengue to the Hospital for Tropical Diseases in Ho Chi Minh City between 2001 and 2009. The analysis population comprised all children with laboratory-confirmed dengue enrolled between days 1-4 of illness. Logistic regression was the main statistical model for all univariate and multivariable analyses. The prognostic value of daily haematocrit levels and platelet counts were assessed using graphs and separate regression models fitted on each day of illness. Among the 2301 children included in the analysis, 143 (6 per cent) progressed to DSS. Significant baseline risk factors for DSS included a history of vomiting, higher temperature, a palpable liver, and a lower platelet count. Prediction models that included serial daily platelet counts demonstrated better ability to discriminate patients who developed DSS from others, than models based on enrolment information only. However inclusion of daily haematocrit values did not improve prediction of DSS.Conclusions/significanceDaily monitoring of platelet counts is important to help identify patients at high risk of DSS. Development of dynamic prediction models that incorporate signs, symptoms, and daily laboratory measurements, could improve DSS prediction and thereby reduce the burden on health services in endemic areas.Author summaryDengue is a very common, potentially serious, mosquitoborne viral infection. The spectrum of clinical disease is broad. Dengue shock syndrome (DSS), seen primarily in children, is the most serious life-threatening manifestation. Early identification of children presenting with dengue who are likely to develop DSS could improve triage and resource allocation in endemic areas. This study, based on data from 2301 Vietnamese children hospitalized with dengue, aimed to assess the value of readily available clinical and laboratory markers, especially platelet counts and haematocrit levels, in predicting DSS. In addition to risk factors present at the first assessment within 1-4 days from fever onset (vomiting, higher temperature, palpable liver, lower platelet count), we showed that serial daily platelet counts provide useful additional information to identify at an early stage children who are likely to develop shock. Although absolute platelet values were already known to be important, this is the 1st study to confirm the usefulness of sequential daily platelet counts. It also provides proof of concept for the value of incorporating serial laboratory and clinical signs into future dynamic prognostic models to allow for earlier identification and better management of children at risk of DSS.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Daily platelet counts may be a useful tool in predicting risk of DSS in pediatric populations in dengue-endemic areas. It will be interesting to see if this procedure is incorporated in those endemic geographic areas, and reduces DSS fatalities. - Mod. TY][A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/52913>.]
