WGNS Radio [edited]<http://www.wgnsradio.com/rocky-mountain-spotted-fever-in-middle-tennessee-cms-39219>Rocky Mountain spotted fever is something you don't hear a lot about, but that does not mean it doesn't happen. After WGNS was told that a recent case of Rocky Mountain spotted fever landed a young lady in the hospital in Murfreesboro, we talked to the Tennessee Department of Health to learn how rare the disease is, which is caused by a tick bite. It is significant to note, the woman hospitalized in Murfreesboro did not receive the tick bite in Rutherford County, but a neighboring county instead.The most recent data that is available shows that 24 confirmed cases have been reported in 2017 in Tennessee. However, only one case was reported in the Mid Cumberland Region. The Mid Cumberland Region includes Cheatham, Dickson, Houston, Humphreys, Montgomery, Robertson, Rutherford, Stewart, Sumner, Trousdale, Williamson and Wilson Counties.The CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] report:Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is a tickborne disease caused by the bacterium _Rickettsia rickettsia_. This organism is a cause of potentially fatal human illness in North and South America, and is transmitted to humans by the bite of infected tick species. In the USA, these include the American dog tick (_Dermacentor variabilis_), Rocky Mountain wood tick (_Dermacentor andersoni_), and brown dog tick (_Rhipicephalus sanguineus_).Typical symptoms include fever, headache, abdominal pain, vomiting, and muscle pain. A rash may also develop, but is often absent in the 1st few days, and in some patients, never develops. Rocky Mountain spotted fever can be a severe or even fatal illness if not treated in the 1st few days of symptoms.Doxycycline is the 1st line treatment for adults and children of all ages, and is most effective if started before the 5th day of symptoms. The initial diagnosis is made based on clinical signs and symptoms, and medical history, and can later be confirmed by using specialized laboratory tests. RMSF and other tickborne diseases can be prevented.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Delayed diagnosis contributes to morbidity and mortality of RMSF. The tetracyclines represent the best drug for treatment, even in children, and the following is the CDC statement in this regard <https://www.cdc.gov/rmsf/doxycycline/index.html>:Background on doxycycline and older tetracycline antimicrobials---------------------------------------------------------------Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum antimicrobials in use since the 1940s. Older tetracycline-class drugs have been linked to cosmetic staining of permanent teeth when used in children before the age of 8 years. As a result, in 1970 a warning label was attached to all tetracycline-class antibiotics advising against the use in children under the age of 8 years.In 1967 doxycycline was introduced as a newer tetracycline-class antibiotic. Doxycycline binds less readily to calcium and has not been shown to cause the same tooth staining. Several studies have previously been published showing the lack of staining of permanent teeth when doxycycline was used in children. The warning, currently present on all tetracycline-class antibiotics, including doxycycline, continues to mention the concern regarding dental staining.Doxycycline and rickettsial diseases------------------------------------Doxycycline is the most effective treatment of all rickettsial diseases including RMSF, ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. It is the antimicrobial recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and CDC for the treatment of suspected rickettsial diseases in patients of all ages. Studies have shown that other antimicrobials are less effective and are associated with a higher number of deaths (case fatality rate).In a 2012 national survey, 80 per cent of clinicians correctly selected doxycycline as the treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in persons 8 years or older, however, only 35 per cent of clinicians correctly chose doxycycline as the treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in children under 8 years. This hesitation may contribute to the increased fatality rate among children. Children under the age of 10 years represent <6 per cent of RMSF cases, but they represent 22 per cent of deaths. The same disproportionate case fatality rate in children has been observed for ehrlichiosis and other serious rickettsial infections.Doxycycline is most effective when given within the first 5 days of illness. Because there is no rapid test to diagnose rickettsial diseases, clinicians must diagnose and treat based on clinical suspicion alone. It is important that concern about dental staining [should] not cause providers to use other antibiotics, or delay the start of treatment in children.The newest evidence-------------------In 2013, researchers from CDC and the Indian Health Service [IHS] began looking into the issue of dental staining following doxycycline usage, to better understand if this is an issue. This study was performed to look at whether or not doxycycline, in the dose and duration used to treat suspected RMSF, caused dental staining in children less than 8 years. The study took place in a community which has suffered from high rates of RMSF since 2003, where a large number of people, including children, were treated with doxycycline.Dentists inspected the permanent teeth of children who had received doxycycline for suspected RMSF prior to their 8th birthday and those who had not. Blinded dentists (without knowing which children had received the drug) looked for tooth staining, evaluated tooth color, and looked for evidence of weakness in the tooth enamel for all children in the study. No differences were found between children who had received doxycycline and those who had not.This study provides the largest sample size and best evidence to date that short courses of doxycycline (such as those used to treat rickettsial diseases) do not cause dental staining when given to children under the age of 8 years.The current label allows for the use of doxycycline in pediatric rickettsial patients because other antimicrobials are not likely to be effective for treatment. However, clearer language on the drug label may help avoid hesitation in prescribing life-saving doxycycline to children, and reinforce CDC and AAP RMSF treatment recommendations. Despite the current label warning, it is important for healthcare providers to know that doxycycline has not been shown to cause tooth staining in the dose and duration used to treat rickettsial diseases. Early administration of doxycycline in adults and children can prevent severe illness and save lives. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/244>.]
