NE 10 [in Portuguese, machine transl., edited]<http://m.blogs.ne10.uol.com.br/casasaudavel/2017/05/03/hospital-das-clinicas-acompanha-tres-casos-de-doenca-infecciosa-nunca-registrada-em-pernambuco/>A total of 3 patients from Serra Talhada, in the SertÌ£o do Pajeu (415 km [258 miles] away from the capital of Pernambuco), are being followed in Recife with an infectious disease previously unknown in the state. A father and his 2 children, all farmers, have been hospitalized for about 15 days at the Hospital das ClÌ nicas of the Federal University of Pernambuco (HC /UFPE), in the University City, West Zone of the city, with coccidioidomycosis, a disease caused by the fungus _Coccidioides immitis_. The disease can be easily mistaken for community-acquired pneumonia or pulmonary tuberculosis.Their health picture is considered stable and they should be discharged in the next few days. The fungal disease can affect soft tissues, joints, bones and meninges. The main symptoms are high fever, coughing and shortness of breath. Coccidioidomycosis is reported in the southern and western United States (California, Texas, Utah, New Mexico, Arizona and Nevada) and in Mexico. In the 1990s, the 1st cases were diagnosed in Brazil, especially in CearÌÁ and PiauÌ , neighbors of Pernambuco.At the Healthy House, the State Department of Health (SES) reported that it was notified of the new disease and will report the cases to the Ministry of Health (MS). ""The doctors at the hospital where the patients were hospitalized did all the investigations and did not complete the diagnosis for pneumonia. Because they did not respond to the treatment, they were transferred to the Hospital das ClÌ nicas,"" explains the head of the Infectious Diseases Service of HC and professor of UFPE, Paulo SÌ©rgio Ramos. In HC, the disease was detected by means of a laboratory examination of the sputum performed by the University's Mycology Department.Generally, the disease is mild and limited, except in people with impaired immunity. ""Epidemiological surveillance has already been triggered and is working towards greater monitoring for the diagnosis of the disease in these areas. We believe that there may have been other cases but they have not closed the correct diagnosis. Patients are coming from rural areas with similar clinical conditions,"" points out Ramos.The capital of Pernambuco is not among the localities of surveillance. ""Because it is an urban area, it is unlikely that we will have cases in Greater Recife. Actions will be directed to these municipalities in the SertÌ£o Pernambuco,"" concludes the doctor. After discharge, farmers should be followed for about 6 months at the Infectology Clinic of Hospital das ClÌ nicas.[byline: Cinthya Leite]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This brief history (with the citations reviewed) of ""cocci"" from Brown J, Benedict K, Park BJ, Thompson GR. Coccidioidomycosis: epidemiology. Clin Epidemiol. 2013; 5: 185-197 is shown below with a statement on the range in South America:""The causative agent of coccidioidomycosis was 1st identified by a medical intern, Alejandro Posadas, in Buenos Aires in 1892. During his medical training, Posadas evaluated an Argentine soldier who had skin lesions previously attributed to mycosis fungoides. Microscopic examination of the soldier's skin biopsy specimens revealed organisms that appeared similar to the protozoan _Coccidia_, leading to a misconception that the microbe was a parasite. A few years later, a manual laborer from the San Joaquin Valley, California, was evaluated for similar skin lesions. Upon his death, autopsy specimens from multiple organs were notable for granulomas containing the same type of ""protozoal"" organisms. A collaborative evaluation of this patient's specimens by Emmet Rixford, a surgeon at Cooper Medical College in San Francisco, and T Caspar Gilchrist and CW Stiles, pathologists at Johns Hopkins Medical School, resulted in the decision that the organism was, indeed, a protozoan. Consequently, in 1896, it was given the name _Coccidioides_ (derived from its morphologic appearance of ""resembling Coccidia"") _immitis_ (""not mild"", because it was believed that the organism caused lethal disease). Just a few years later, William OphÌ ls and Herbert C Moffitt, accurately classified _C. immitis_ as a fungus. These investigators satisfied Koch's postulates by inoculating material from a case patient into guinea pigs, which subsequently developed signs of infection, culturing the fungal organism from the animals' organs, and ultimately injecting mycelia from this culture into a rabbit, which developed _Coccidioides_-containing nodules in tissue.""In South America, endemic regions have been found in northern Venezuela and northeastern Brazil. Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay, and Nicaragua also may have some endemic areas. The precision of these surveys is unknown, though, since skin tests may cross-react with other mycoses such as _Histoplasma capsulatum_, _Blastomyces dermatitidis_, and _Paracoccidioides brasiliensis_, which may also be endemic in these regions.""Pernambuco is a state of Brazil, located in the Northeast region of the country, the area of the country where coccidioidomycosis has been reported but it is not clear if previous cases have been reported from Pernambuco. The state can be seen on a map at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pernambuco>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/15269>.]
