Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/ecoli/2017/o157h7-03-17/index.html>Introduction------------CDC has collaborated with public health and regulatory officials in many states and FDA to investigate a multistate outbreak of Shiga toxin producing (enterohemorrhagic) Escherichia coli (EHEC) infections. Public health investigators used the PulseNet system to identify illnesses that might be part of this outbreak. A total of 32 people infected with the outbreak strains of EHEC O157:H7 were reported from 12 states. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) performed on clinical isolates from ill people showed that the isolates were closely related genetically. This close genetic relationship provided more evidence that people in this outbreak became ill from a common source.Illnesses started on dates ranging from [Wed 4 Jan to Tue 18 Apr 2017]. Ill people ranged in age from 1 to 70 years, with a median age of 9. Up to 26 (81 per cent) of the 32 ill people were younger than 18 years. Among ill people, 59 per cent were male. 12 ill people were hospitalized, and 9 people developed hemolytic uremic syndrome [HUS], a type of kidney failure. No deaths were reported.State / Case countArizona / 4California / 5Florida / 2Illinois / 1Massachusetts / 1Maryland / 1Missouri / 1New Jersey / 1Oregon / 11Virginia / 2Washington / 2Wisconsin / 1Investigation of the outbreak-----------------------------Epidemiologic, laboratory, and traceback evidence indicated that IM Health brand SoyNut Butter was the likely source of this outbreak. SoyNut Butter is a nut-free substitute for peanut butter.In interviews, ill people or their family members answered questions about the foods they ate and other exposures in the week before they became ill. A total of 25 (78 per cent) of the 32 people reached for interview reported either eating IM Healthy brand SoyNut Butter at home (19 people) in the week before they became ill, attending a facility that served IM Healthy brand SoyNut Butter (2 people), or attending childcare centers that served IM Healthy brand SoyNut Butter and IM Healthy brand granola coated with SoyNut Butter (4 people).Investigators reported to CDC 2 more ill people who either developed HUS or had a diagnostic test showing they were infected with EHEC bacteria. In interviews, both of these ill people reported eating IM Healthy brand SoyNut Butter in the week before becoming ill. However, CDC did not include these people in the outbreak case count because no bacterial isolates, or samples, were available for DNA fingerprinting. Public health investigators use DNA fingerprinting to identify illnesses that are part of multistate outbreaks.Laboratory testing identified EHEC O157:H7 in opened containers of IM Healthy brand SoyNut Butter collected from the homes of ill people in California, Oregon, and Washington. Officials in California also isolated EHEC O157:H7 in unopened containers of IM Healthy brand SoyNut Butter collected from retail locations. WGS showed that the EHEC O157:H7 in all of these containers of SoyNut Butter were closely related genetically to isolates from ill people, providing more evidence that people in this outbreak got sick from eating I.M. Healthy brand SoyNut butter.Although the outbreak investigation is over, illnesses may continue for some time. The recalled SoyNut Butter products have long shelf lives and may still be in people's homes or in institutions. Consumers who don't know about the recalls could continue to eat the products and get sick. The recalled products are listed on the Recalls and Advice to Consumers page.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Brent Barrett[The use of genetic screening looking for the gene coding for Shiga toxin as a screening test for EHEC as well as such molecular analysis for other causes of diarrhea (including bacteria, viruses and protozoa) has the disadvantage (unless backup cultures are performed) not having the intact organism available for other types of analysis (for tracking outbreaks) or performing antimicrobial sensitivities.ProMED-mail thanks Brent Barrett for this posting. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
