WHO Disease Outbreak News [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/05-may-2017-hepatitis-e-niger/en/>Hepatitis E - Niger-------------------On 12 Apr 2017, the Niger Ministry of Health notified WHO of a hepatitis E virus (HEV) outbreak in the Diffa region, located in the eastern part of the country. On [Wed 19 Apr 2017], the outbreak was officially declared by the Minister of Health.Since [Mon 9 Jan 2017], an increase in cases of jaundice was noted at the Centre Mere-Enfant de Diffa (Mother and Child Center) among pregnant women. Initially, the cases presented with headache, vomiting, fever, conjunctivitis, pelvic pain, and memory loss.Yellow fever was initially suspected as the cause of this outbreak. However, considering a number of cases among pregnant women reporting to the Mother and Child Center in Diffa and the HEV outbreak in neighboring Chad, HEV was also considered as a potential cause of signs and symptoms. Samples were collected and sent to Institut Pasteur de Dakar (IPD) for laboratory testing. Of the 29 samples tested so far, all tested negative for yellow fever and 15 tested positive for hepatitis E by PCR.As of [Wed 3 May 2017], a total of 282 suspected cases including 27 deaths have been reported. All reported deaths except for one death are among pregnant women (mortality ratio: 9.6 per cent). To date, 5 of the 6 districts in the Diffa region have reported cases, and 188 cases are from the Diffa and N'Guigmi districts. The Diffa region is a region affected by the Lake Chad basin crisis and there is frequent movement across the border.Public health response----------------------On [Thu 6 Apr 2017], the Ministry of Health convened an emergency meeting to review and better understand the situation of the suspected outbreak. The following activities have been initiated in response to the outbreak: - The contingency plan was activated and weekly coordination meetings are being held to coordinate outbreak response activities. - A preliminary outbreak investigation has been carried out in Diffa during which biological samples were obtained. In line with the ""One Health"" approach, preparations for an in-depth investigation are under way. - Case management, at no cost to patients, is being implemented, mainly with support from WHO and M̩decins Sans Fronti̬res. - Surveillance for hepatitis E is being strengthened by the inclusion of hepatitis E to the list of mandatory reported diseases. - Community engagement to encourage ""early care seeking"" is being strengthened, particularly among pregnant women. - Cross border collaborations with neighboring countries are also being strengthened through regular information sharing. - A comprehensive outbreak response plan is being prepared and will be used to mobilize the required resources.WHO risk assessment-------------------Cases are also reported among displaced or refugee populations, impending cross-border spread to Lake Chad basin countries, especially neighboring areas in Nigeria, Chad and Northern Cameron cannot be ruled out. In addition, the source and scale of the outbreak in Niger needs to be established.This is the 1st confirmed hepatitis E outbreak in Niger. It is important to note that this event has occurred in a region where vulnerable populations are in a precarious situation following displacement due to insecurity. Currently, Diffa region is the main area affected.To better understand the magnitude of the outbreak, active case finding is being conducted in different health centers in the region and at community level. The reinforcement of water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) interventions will support breaking the transmission of the virus and the prevention of new cases. It will be important to keep the cross border communication ongoing so that experiences on management of hepatitis E outbreaks can be exchanged.WHO advice----------WHO strongly recommends an in-depth investigation of the current HEV outbreak in order to ascertain the magnitude of the event and sources of infection. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conduct risk assessments as new information becomes available. WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restriction to Niger based on the current information available.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp[The following regarding hepatitis E virus infection during pregnancy is extracted from: Chaudhry SA, Verma N, Koren G. Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy. Can Fam Physician. 2015;61: 607-608:""Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy and in the 3rd trimester, especially with genotype 1, is associated with more severe infection and might lead to fulminant hepatic failure and maternal death (11-13). Although the mechanism of liver injury is not yet clear, it is possible that interplay of hormonal and immunologic changes during pregnancy, along with a high viral load of HEV, renders the woman more vulnerable (14). Immunologic changes during pregnancy promote the maintenance of the fetus in the maternal environment by suppression of T cell-mediated immunity, rendering pregnant women more susceptible to viral infections like HEV infection. During pregnancy, levels of progesterone, estrogen, and human chorionic gonadotropin increase as pregnancy advances. These hormones play a considerable role in altering immune regulation and increasing viral replications (15).Hepatitis E infection with genotype 1 during the 3rd trimester can lead to maternal mortality in up to 15 per cent to 25 per cent of cases (16). Most of the studies showing high maternal mortality are from India, where infection occurs in epidemics. There is a very high risk of vertical transmission of HEV from the mother to the fetus. During a Delhi epidemic, a hospital-based study revealed that HEV infection during pregnancy was associated with miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death in 56 per cent of infants (6). One recent study highlights that HEV infection might be responsible for 2400 to 3000 stillbirths each year in developing countries, with many additional fetal deaths linked to antenatal maternal deaths (11). There is a very high risk of preterm delivery in pregnant women with HEV infection, with poor neonatal survival rates (11,17). In 2 separate studies from India, 15 per cent to 50 per cent of live-born infants of mothers with HEV infection died within 1 week of birth (11,18). During an outbreak in Sudan in 2010 to 2011, among 39 pregnant women with HEV infection there were 14 intrauterine deaths and 9 premature deliveries (19).""References:-----------6. Naidu SS, Viswanathan R. Infectious hepatitis in pregnancy during Delhi epidemic. Indian J Med Res. 1957; 45(Suppl): 71-76.11. Patra S, Kumar A, Trivedi SS, Puri M, Sarin SK. Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with acute hepatitis E virus infection. Ann Intern Med. 2007; 147: 28-33.12. Teo CG. Fatal outbreaks of jaundice in pregnancy and the epidemic history of hepatitis E. Epidemiol Infect. 2012; 140: 767-787.13. Devi SG, Kumar A, Kar P, Husain SA, Sharma S. Association of pregnancy outcome with cytokine gene polymorphisms in HEV infection during pregnancy. J Med Virol. 2014; 86: 1366-1376.14. Fiore S, Savasi V. Treatment of viral hepatitis in pregnancy. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2009; 10: 2801-2809.15. Navaneethan U, Al Mohajer M, Shata MT. Hepatitis E and pregnancy: understanding the pathogenesis. Liver Int. 2008; 28: 1190-1199.16. Ranger-Rogez S, Alain S, Denis F. Hepatitis viruses: mother to child transmission [article in French] Pathol Biol (Paris) 2002; 50: 568-575.17. Krain LJ, Atwell JE, Nelson KE, Labrique AB. Fetal and neonatal health consequences of vertically transmitted hepatitis E virus infection. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014; 90: 365-370.18. Rasheeda CA, Navaneethan U, Jayanthi V. Liver disease in pregnancy and its influence on maternal and fetal mortality: a prospective study from Chennai, Southern India. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008; 20: 362-364.19. Rayis DA, Jumaa AM, Gasim GI, Karsany MS, Adam I. An outbreak of hepatitis E and high maternal mortality at Port Sudan, Eastern Sudan. Pathog Glob Health. 2013;107: 66-68. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/58>.]
