BBC [edited]<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-39856642>A resurgence of a cholera outbreak in war-torn Yemen is believed to have killed 34 people in the past 2 weeks.The WHO says 2022 suspected cases of cholera and acute watery diarrhea (AWD) were reported between 27 Apr and 7 May 2017. Some 26 000 people have now been affected since October 2016 by the outbreak, which subsided over the winter. The country's health system and civilian infrastructure are collapsing after 2 years of conflict.The WHO says fewer than 45% of health facilities are fully functioning, with almost 300 damaged or destroyed in fighting between forces loyal to President Abdrabbuh Mansour Hadi -- who is backed by a Saudi-led multinational coalition -- and those allied to the Houthi rebel movement. More than 8 million people also lack access to drinking water and sanitation.A WHO spokesman said recent heavy rains had washed piles of uncollected waste into wells and water sources. In addition, warmer weather is creating a favorable environment for the pathogens that cause cholera to spread.M̩decins Sans Fronti̬res (MSF), which has set up cholera treatment centres within 5 hospitals to isolate and treat patients presenting symptoms and is supporting other facilities, expressed fear that the local health authorities alone would not be able to deal with the surge in cases. ""We are very concerned that the disease will continue to spread and become out of control,"" warned the charity's head of mission in Yemen, Shinjiro Murata. Mr Murata said humanitarian assistance needed to be scaled up urgently.The WHO spokesman said preventing the spread of the outbreak was a high priority and that it was coordinating efforts ""with all parties to ensure an effective and rapid response."" The UN says more than 8010 people -- mostly civilians -- have been killed and close to 44 500 others injured since the conflict in Yemen escalated in March 2015. The fighting has also left 18.8 million people in need of humanitarian assistance.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Contaminated water remains the major risk factor for the acquisition of _Vibrio cholerae_. As reported in Africa (currently in the Horn of Africa), periods of flooding and drought increase the risk of outbreaks. As demonstrated in Haiti, the introduction of cholera into a country with a destroyed sanitary system and no underlying immunity can cause a major epidemic and, likewise, in a country such as Yemen besieged by war. In the classical endemic areas such as the Indian subcontinent and other areas in Asia, rainy seasons often accentuate the number of cases. Acute watery diarrhea is often used as an alternative term for cholera, which is the primary cause of outbreaks of watery diarrhea with fatalities in adults. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/126>.]
