The Huffington Post [edited]<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/the-deadliest-form-of-tuberculosis-is-snowballing_us_59120cd9e4b05e1ca20266f0>   The deadliest forms of tuberculosis are worsening in four of the countries with the largest number of TB cases, according to a new report in the Lancet Infectious Diseases journal [1]. While tuberculosis, when treated, has an over 83 percent cure rate on average globally, multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB), which is resistant to the standard TB antibiotic regimen, has about a 52 percent survival rate if treated. Extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB) has a 28 percent survival rate when treated. Currently, almost 40 percent of all multidrug-resistant tuberculosis cases ‰Û¥ about 230 000 ‰Û¥ occur in Russia, India, the Philippines and South Africa, according to Lancet. And this study predicts that by 2040, a third of all tuberculosis cases in Russia, 1 in 10 in India and the Philippines, and 1 in 20 in South Africa are expected to be multidrug-resistant. In 2000, only 24.8 percent of cases in Russia, 7.9 percent in India, 6 percent in the Philippines and 2.5 percent in South Africa were multidrug-resistant. Increasingly, the report argues, drug-resistant tuberculosis will be caused by person-to-person infection, rather than acquired resistance. ""Many people believe that if you do a good job finding or treating people with drug-susceptible TB, that is, if you don't create it in the first place, then it'll go away by itself,"" said Dr. Peter Cegielski, team lead for prevention, care and treatment of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Global TB Branch. ""But what this study shows is that it's not going to happen.""As Cegielski put it, there's already too much drug-resistant TB out there, and it will continue to transmit from person to person without a marked increase in efforts to combat it. For Lucica Ditiu, the executive director of the international Stop TB Partnership, the report emphasizes what the TB community knows. ""We'll never see the end of the epidemic with continuous transmission happening,"" she said. ""This is an airborne disease ‰Û¥ it doesn't respect any kind of political boundaries,"" Cegielski said. He added that the research and drugs we have for TB, which is the world's top infectious disease killer, are behind the scale of the epidemic. ""The drugs we have now were created in the middle of the 20th century, but the problems we have now are 21st-century problems."" For Eric Goosby, the United Nations special envoy on tuberculosis, the Lancet report underlines that TB is here to stay unless there is a marked uptick in the resources devoted to fighting it. ""Global response is the only way we will contain this,"" he said. Advocates point to a growing momentum and interest marked by the scheduling of a ministerial conference in Russia in November [2017] and the first-ever U.N. high-level meeting focusing solely on TB in 2018. But, at the last major ministerial meeting in 2009, the member states of the WHO vowed to ""address the alarming threat of M/XDR-TB"" that affected over 50 countries. MDR-TB is now in over 153 countries. ""Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis is a crisis. We have declared it a public health crisis,"" said Dr. Mario Raviglione, director of the World Health Organization's Global TB Programme. ""We keep repeating it is a crisis and we keep repeating that it requires investment."" The WHO declared tuberculosis a global health emergency in 1993. Since then, drug-resistant cases have increased. ""This remains an orphan cause,"" Raviglione said. [Byline: By Lauren Weber][1. Sharma A, Hill A, Kurbatova E, et al. Estimating the future burden of multidrug-resistant and extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis in India, the Philippines, Russia, and South Africa: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. Published online: 09 May 2017. Abstract available: <http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/laninf/PIIS1473-3099(17)30247-5.pdf>.]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The following is the abstract from the referenced article cited in the news report above:""Summary------------""Background---------------""Multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR) tuberculosis are emerging worldwide. The Green Light Committee initiative supported programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis in 90 countries. We used estimates from the Preserving Effective TB Treatment Study to predict MDR and XDR tuberculosis trends in four countries with a high burden of MDR tuberculosis: India, the Philippines, Russia, and South Africa.""Methods-----------""We calibrated a compartmental model to data from drug resistance surveys and WHO tuberculosis reports to forecast estimates of incident MDR and XDR tuberculosis and the percentage of incident MDR and XDR tuberculosis caused by acquired drug resistance, assuming no fitness cost of resistance from 2000 to 2040 in India, the Philippines, Russia, and South Africa.""Findings-----------""The model forecasted the percentage of MDR tuberculosis among incident cases of tuberculosis to increase, reaching 12åá4% (95% prediction interval 9åá4-16åá2) in India, 8åá9% (4åá5-11åá7) in the Philippines, 32åá5% (27åá0-35åá8) in Russia, and 5åá7% (3åá0-7åá6) in South Africa in 2040. It also predicted the percentage of XDR tuberculosis among incident MDR tuberculosis to increase, reaching 8åá9% (95% prediction interval 5åá1-12åá9) in India, 9åá0% (4åá0-14åá7) in the Philippines, 9åá0% (4åá8-14åá2) in Russia, and 8åá5% (2åá5-14åá7) in South Africa in 2040. Acquired drug resistance would cause less than 30% of incident MDR tuberculosis during 2000-40. Acquired drug resistance caused 80% of incident XDR tuberculosis in 2000, but this estimate would decrease to less than 50% by 2040.""Interpretation------------------""MDR and XDR tuberculosis were forecast to increase in all four countries despite improvements in acquired drug resistance shown by the Green Light Committee-supported programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis. Additional control efforts beyond improving acquired drug resistance rates are needed to stop the spread of MDR and XDR tuberculosis in countries with a high burden of MDR tuberculosis.""Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is a form of tuberculosis (TB) that is resistant to at least isoniazid and rifampin, the 2 most potent 1st-line drugs used for the treatment of tuberculosis. Extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB) is a subset of MDR-TB that is resistant to isoniazid and rifampin, as well as resistant to fluoroquinolones and at least one of the 3 2nd-line injectable anti-TB drugs (amikacin, kanamycin, or capreomycin).MDR-TB may be primary or secondary (referred in the article above as ""acquired""). Secondary MDR-TB is acquired as a consequence of the emergence of drug-resistant mutants during inadequate or improper use of anti-TB medications for active TB. Primary MDR-TB is a new infection (in the absence of a history of prior treatment with anti-TB drugs) that has been acquired from someone with MDR-TB (i.e., person-to-person transmission).Primary drug resistance indicates need for better TB control to interrupt transmission, whereas secondary drug resistance indicates need for better patient anti-TB drug management to prevent the emergence of antimicrobial resistant mutants during drug therapy.Transmission usually requires close, repeated or prolonged contact with a contagious individual in a poorly ventilated environment that occurs in households or institutions, such as homeless shelters. However, reports posted previously by ProMED-mail from China (Tuberculosis, MDR - China: (Shanghai) primary, neighborhood outbreaks, 2009-2012 20161216.4702532) and Singapore (Tuberculosis, MDR - Singapore (03): (AMK) linked to 2012 cybercafÌ© outbreak 20160622.4302632 and Tuberculosis, MDR - Singapore (02): (AMK) neighbrhd outbrk, same genotp, 2012-16 20160619.4296808), cases of MDR-TB were linked to same residential community setting or use of the same public facility such as food markets. - Mod.ML]
