El Mundo [in Spanish, machine trans., edited]<http://www.elmundo.es/ciencia-y-salud/salud/2017/05/10/5912dbc0e2704e474a8b4578.html>Health authorities have withdrawn lots of tuna from Almeria suspected of causing food poisoning to more than 35 people across the country due to the presence of histamine. As a precautionary measure, the Consumer, Food Safety and Nutrition Agency (Aecosan) recommends not consuming fresh tuna purchased between [25 Apr and 5 May 2017].The Agency of the Ministry of Health, Social Services and Equality received on [Tue 9 May 2017], communication of the existence of an outbreak with 11 affected in the Community of Madrid appeared on [Fri 5 May 2017], which are added to the 21 cases of people affected in Andalusia by food poisoning by histamine, after consumption of freshly bought tuna, of which they were informed on [Sat 6 May 2017]. Likewise, it has detected new cases in the national territory, 4 in Andalusia and 4 associated cases in Murcia, and has been made aware of cases in European countries, such as France and Italy, where people have been food poisoned by histamine after consumption of fresh tuna corresponding to different batches to those identified until now.All those affected by this food poisoning have had mild episodes, characterized by throat itching, facial flushing and sweating, nausea and vomiting, headache and cutaneous erythema. In none of the cases has hospital admission been necessary and all have evolved favorably.The tuna involved in the emergence of these outbreaks was marketed in different lots by the Almeria company Garciden and was distributed in the autonomous communities of Murcia, Valencia, Aragon, Andalusia, Castile and Leon, Basque Country, Madrid and Catalonia, and at European level in Germany, Italy and Portugal.These lots are being withdrawn by both the marketing company, on a voluntary basis, through notification to its customers, as well as the Andalusian and national health authorities, through the food alert network. However, it must be kept in mind that tuna may have been purchased in small quantities and in different formats in fishmongers or other shops that sell to the final consumer, so it is possible that some households still have quantities of this product for consumption.In this regard, Aecosan recommends that those who have acquired fresh tuna between 25 Apr 2017 and 5 May 2017 should contact the fishmonger or the shop where they purchased it and ask if it corresponds to the product marketed by that company. If so, it is recommended not to consume it. Also, health officials advise that if after a few minutes, and up to 3 hours, after having ingested tuna, any person notices any of the symptoms described above, consult your doctor. Both the communities involved and the State Administration keep all the necessary mechanisms to guarantee the safety of the products made available to the consumer.The occurrence of histamine is associated with poor hygiene in food handling and poor fish preservation, usually at elevated temperatures for extended periods of time. In addition, it resists the thermal processes typical of cooking. Histamine is a compound naturally present in the body, a vasodilator that can be released in allergic reactions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Two good reviews on the subject can be found at:1.- Taylor SL, Stratton JE and Nordlee JA: Histamine poisoning (scombroid fish poisoning): an allergy-like intoxication. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1989;27(4-5): 225-40.Abstract--------Histamine poisoning results from the consumption of foods, typically certain types of fish and cheeses that contain unusually high levels of histamine. Spoiled fish of the families, Scombridae and Scomberesocidae (e.g. tuna, mackerel, bonito), are commonly implicated in incidents of histamine poisoning, which leads to the common usage of the term, ""scombroid fish poisoning"", to describe this illness. However, certain non-scombroid fish, most notably mahi-mahi, bluefish, and sardines, when spoiled are also commonly implicated in histamine poisoning. Also, on rare occasions cheeses, especially Swiss cheese, can be implicated in histamine poisoning. The symptoms of histamine poisoning generally resemble the symptoms encountered with IgE-mediated food allergies. The symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, an oral burning sensation or peppery taste, hives, itching, red rash, and hypotension. The onset of the symptoms usually occurs within a few minutes after ingestion of the implicated food, and the duration of symptoms ranges from a few hours to 24 h. Antihistamines can be used effectively to treat this intoxication. Histamine is formed in foods by certain bacteria that are able to decarboxylate the amino acid, histidine. However, foods containing unusually high levels of histamine may not appear to be outwardly spoiled. Foods with histamine concentrations exceeding 50 mg per 100 g of food are generally considered to be hazardous. Histamine formation in fish can be prevented by proper handling and refrigerated storage while the control of histamine formation in cheese seems dependent on insuring that histamine-producing bacteria are not present in significant numbers in the raw milk.2.- Hungerford JM: Scombroid poisoning: a review. Toxicon. 2010;56(2):231-43. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2010.02.006.Abstract--------Scombroid poisoning, also called histamine fish poisoning, is an allergy-like form of food poisoning that continues to be a major problem in seafood safety. The exact role of histamine in scombroid poisoning is not straightforward. Deviations from the expected dose-response have led to the advancement of various possible mechanisms of toxicity, none of them proven. Histamine action levels are used in regulation until more is known about the mechanism of scombroid poisoning. Scombroid poisoning and histamine are correlated but complicated. Victims of scombroid poisoning respond well to antihistamines, and chemical analyses of fish implicated in scombroid poisoning generally reveal elevated levels of histamine. Scombroid poisoning is unique among the seafood toxins since it results from product mishandling rather than contamination from other trophic levels. Inadequate cooling following harvest promotes bacterial histamine production, and can result in outbreaks of scombroid poisoning. Fish with high levels of free histidine, the enzyme substrate converted to histamine by bacterial histidine decarboxylase, are those most often implicated in scombroid poisoning. Laboratory methods and screening methods for detecting histamine are available in abundance, but need to be compared and validated to harmonize testing. Successful field testing, including dockside or on-board testing needed to augment HACCP efforts will have to integrate rapid and simplified detection methods with simplified and rapid sampling and extraction. Otherwise, time-consuming sample preparation reduces the impact of gains in detection speed on the overall analysis time.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/43>.]
