Sacramento (CA) Bee [edited]<http://www.sacbee.com/news/local/article149818204.html>Nacho cheese sauce is the likely culprit in a botulism outbreak that has sickened at least 5 people who visited a Walnut Grove gas station.On [Wed 10 May 2017], Sacramento County Public Health officials pinpointed the source of the botulism outbreak as ""prepared food, particularly nacho cheese sauce"" from Valley Oak Food and Fuel gas station in the Delta. Five people are hospitalized in serious condition with botulism, a rare but serious paralytic illness caused by a nerve toxin, and an additional patient is suspected of having the illness.People who ate prepared food, especially nacho cheese sauce, from the station between April 23 and May 5 [2017] and report symptoms should contact their medical provider immediately, the health department said.The gas station, which sits on a busy stretch of River Road across from the Walnut Grove Bridge, stopped selling food and drink products on May 5 [2017] after the county Department of Environmental Management temporarily revoked its permit. Employees of the gas station refused to comment this week [week of 7 Sun 2017] on the suspected outbreak.Botulism symptoms include trouble breathing, blurry vision, slurred speech and droopy eyelids. Hospitals treat botulism with an antitoxin followed by intravenous liquids and breathing support, she said. About 5 to 10 percent of botulism cases are fatal, according to the World Health Organization.Clostridium botulinum, the bacteria that leads to botulism, thrives in moist, low-oxygen, low-acidity environments, such as in homemade canned foods or cooked commercial foods stored at the wrong temperature, said Linda Harris, a food safety microbiologist at UC Davis. The bacteria is heat-resistant, so it won't die during the cooking process like other harmful organisms.The U.S. saw 161 confirmed cases of botulism in 2014, only 15 of which were food-borne, according to the most recent report from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Most of the other cases were among infants who ingested clostridium botulinum spores before their digestive systems were fully formed.The California Department of Public Health is investigating 2 cases of botulism in Orange County this week, both of which are linked to a deer-antler tea product. Other recent food-borne botulism outbreaks involved pesto from a San Clemente farm in 2014 and home-canned potatoes served at an Ohio church potluck in 2015.[Byline: Sammy Caiola]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Nacho cheese is a soft cheese product that is generally used to drizzle on top of nacho chips. No information is available regarding whether the product was home or commercially made but it is likely to have been home made as no recall of a commercial product has appeared.Botulism is not commonly related to cheese products but the association has been reported. One example of the association is:Townes JM, Cieslak PR, Hatheway CL, et al: An outbreak of type A botulism associated with a commercial cheese sauce. Ann Intern Med. 1996;125: 558-563.AbstractAlthough botulism is rare, recognition of a possible case of this illness represents a public health emergency. To prevent more cases, prompt investigation must be done to determine whether illness is linked to commercial product or restaurant. Botulism can masquerade as other illnesses, and seemingly unlikely foods can harbor botulinum toxin.Up to 8 of 52 patrons (15 percent) met the case definition for botulism. In 4 of the 8 patrons, and illness other than botulism was initially diagnosed. Five of the 8 were hospitalized, and one died. Stool cultures from 4 patrons yielded type AC. botulinum, and 2 serum samples contained botulinum toxin. All ill persons ate food from the delicatessen on 1 October 1993. Of the 22 persons who ate at the delicatessen that day, all 8 ill persons but none of the 14 well persons ate a potato stuffed with meat and cheese sauce. An open can of cheese sauce contained type A botulinum toxin and yielded _C. botulinum_ on culture. Cheese sauce experimentally inoculated with _C. botulinum_ spores became toxic after 8 days at a temperature of 22 degrees C (71.6 F) (room temperature).A commercial, canned cheese caused a botulism outbreak. This product readily becomes toxic when contaminated by _C. botulinum_ spores and left at room temperature. Mild botulism caused by unusual vehicles may be misdiagnosed. Botulism should be included in the differential diagnosis of persons with signs or symptoms of acute cranial nerve dysfunction. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
