WISH-TV [edited]<http://wishtv.com/2017/05/10/health-dept-man-likely-died-from-food-served-at-mexican-restaurant/>Indiana State Department of Health officials determined food from a West Lafayette restaurant was most likely the source of a man's death in October 2016. An investigation, which ended [Wed 10 May 2017], was conducted into Agave Azul [Mexican restaurant] by the Tippecanoe County Health Department and Coroner's Office, along with the Indiana State Department of Health, the CDC and the FDA. It started after 4 people had reported gastrointestinal illnesses shortly after eating at the restaurant on 22 October 2016. They had eaten dishes containing beef, chicken or pork. One of the 4 people was hospitalized. Despite aggressive medical treatment, the 66-year-old man died on 26 Oct 2016.The Tippecanoe County Health Department said the symptoms and rapid onset of illness experienced by the sick people were consistent with infection due to _Clostridium perfringens_, a bacterium that can be harmful to humans. According to the CDC, it's one of the most common types of foodborne illness and it causes nearly 1 million illnesses per year. The bacteria is commonly found on raw meat and poultry and most commonly associated with foodborne illness.State health officials tested fecal samples taken from 2 of the victims, including the person who died, which showed the presence of _Clostridium perfringens_. The Tippecanoe County Coroner's Office determined [Z] died from ischemic colitis due to _Clostridium perfringens_.The Tippecanoe County Health Department conducted 5 inspections of Agave Azul from October 2016 - February 2017. Those revealed several deficiencies in food handling practices. Those violations included keeping cooked food stored at inadequate temperatures, which is consistent with the growth of _Clostridium perfringens_. Health department inspectors collected food samples prepared at Agave Azul on 27 October 2016. Those were submitted to the FDA for analysis. The FDA was unable to confirm the presence of _Clostridium perfringens_ in those samples. However, the FDA said significant delays in the testing process at the laboratory may have impacted the accuracy of the tests.The Indiana State Department of Health concluded that the most likely source of infection was food consumed at Agave Azul.[Byline: Alexandra Kruczek]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Unlike staphylococcal foodborne illness where the preformed toxin is ingested, in _C. perfringens_ disease, the enterotoxin is formed _in situ_ in the gastrointestinal tract. The following discussion is obtained from the FDA Bad Bug Book <http://www.fda.gov/food/foodborneillnesscontaminants/causesofillnessbadbugbook/ucm070483.htm>""1. Name of the organism_Clostridium perfringens_ is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming rod. It is widely distributed in the environment and frequently occurs in the intestines of humans and many domestic and feral animals. Spores of the organism persist in soil, sediments, and areas subject to human or animal fecal pollution.2. Nature of acute diseasePerfringens food poisoning is the term used to describe the common foodborne illness caused by _C. perfringens_. A more serious but rare illness is also caused by ingesting food contaminated with type C strains. The latter illness is known as enteritis necroticans or pig-bel disease.3. Nature of diseaseThe common form of perfringens poisoning is characterized by intense abdominal cramps and diarrhea, which begin 8-22 hours after consumption of foods containing large numbers of those _C. perfringens_ bacteria capable of producing the food poisoning toxin. The illness is usually over within 24 hours, but less severe symptoms may persist in some individuals for 1-2 weeks. A few deaths have been reported as a result of dehydration and other complications.Necrotic enteritis (pig-bel) caused by _C. perfringens_ is often fatal. This disease also begins as a result of ingesting large numbers of the causative bacteria in contaminated foods. Deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA.Infective dose: The symptoms are caused by ingestion of large numbers (greater than 100 0000 000) vegetative cells. Toxin production in the digestive tract (or in test tubes) is associated with sporulation. This disease is a food infection; only one episode has ever implied the possibility of intoxication (that is, disease from preformed toxin).4. Diagnosis of human illnessPerfringens poisoning is diagnosed by its symptoms and the typical delayed onset of illness. Diagnosis is confirmed by detecting the toxin in the feces of patients. Bacteriological confirmation can also be done by finding exceptionally large numbers of the causative bacteria in implicated foods or in the feces of patients.5. Associated foodsIn most instances, the actual cause of poisoning by _C. perfringens_ is temperature abuse of prepared foods. Small numbers of the organisms are often present after cooking and multiply to food poisoning levels during cool down and storage of prepared foods. Meats, meat products, and gravy are the foods most frequently implicated.6. Relative frequency of diseasePerfringens poisoning is one of the most commonly reported foodborne illnesses in the USA. There were 1162 cases in 1981, in 28 separate outbreaks. At least 10-20 outbreaks have been reported annually in the USA for the past 2 decades. Typically, dozens or even hundreds of persons are affected. It is probable that many outbreaks go unreported because the implicated foods or patient feces are not tested routinely for _C. perfringens_ or its toxin. CDC estimates that about 10 000 actual cases occur annually in the USA.7. Course of disease and complicationsThe disease generally lasts 24 hours. In the elderly or infirm, symptoms may last 1-2 weeks. Complications and/or death only very rarely occur.8. Target populationsInstitutional feeding (such as school cafeterias, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, etc.) where large quantities of food are prepared several hours before serving is the most common circumstance in which perfringens poisoning occurs. The young and elderly are the most frequent victims of perfringens poisoning. Except in the case of pig-bel syndrome, complications are few in persons under 30 years of age. Elderly persons are more likely to experience prolonged or severe symptoms.9. Food analysisStandard bacteriological culturing procedures are used to detect the organism in implicated foods and in feces of patients. Serological assays are used for detecting enterotoxin in the feces of patients and for testing the ability of strains to produce toxin. The procedures take 1-3 days.""The FDA discussion notes that deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA but seems to have occurred in this instance. The following is a paper regarding a case of pigbel:Gui L, Subramony C, Fratkin J, Hughson MD: Fatal enteritis necroticans (pigbel) in a diabetic adult. Mod Pathol. 2002; 15(1): 66-70; <http://www.nature.com/modpathol/journal/v15/n1/full/3880491a.html>""AbstractEnteritis necroticans is a segmental necrotizing infection of the jejunum and ileum caused by _Clostridium perfringens_, type C. The disease occurs sporadically in parts of Asia, Africa, and the South Pacific, where it primarily affects children with severe protein malnutrition. The disease is extremely rare in developed countries, where it has been seen primarily in diabetics. Two cases have previously been reported in the United States, one in a child with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes. A 66-year-old woman with a 12-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus developed severe abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea after eating a meal of turkey sausage. She died unattended at home. An autopsy showed peritonitis and segmental necrosis of the jejunum and ileum. Microscopic examination showed Gram-positive club-shaped bacilli consistent with Clostridia coating a necrotic mucosa. Products of cpa and cpb genes of _C. perfringens_, type C were identified in the necrotic jejunum by polymerase chain reaction amplification.""It is not known if the fatal case had a history of diabetes. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/217>.]
