El Pais [in Spanish, machine transl,. edited]<http://ccaa.elpais.com/ccaa/2017/05/05/madrid/1493976389_613233.html>The rise of hepatitis A throughout Spain is especially strong in the Community of Madrid, where registered cases have gone from 73 during 2015 to 223 in 2016, and 372 only so far in 2017. Although not generally treated as a serious illness - the symptoms are mild, although in adults they may last for months - the Ministry of Health has transmitted its concern to the health centers so that they are alert, and it will make a campaign of diffusion of preventive measures through different LGBT groups, since the main route by which the virus is being transmitted is risky sexual relations, especially among men.The hepatitis A virus (one of the least serious of the 5 types of hepatitis that exist) is mostly present in feces and blood. Their presence was gradually reduced to almost disappear, both in Europe and in other developed countries, as hygienic conditions, food care and the quality of water supply improved. About 15 years ago, its incidence was almost nil in Spain: most cases were imported by travelers, explains the general director of Public Health of the Community of Madrid, Juan Martinez Hernandez. ""However, since then, their presence has become more frequent with sexual contacts being the main route of transmission,"" he adds. ""There are, however, other important forms of contagion, especially among people who live together,"" he adds.In mid-2016, there was a sharp increase in cases of hepatitis A in Spain, according to the Ministry of Health last month [April 2017]. In the Community of Madrid, the rebound began to be more marked in December 2016. Thus, in spite of the fact that in the last decade there have been several peaks - as in 2008 when the cases were raised to 361, this year's [2017] figures promise to exceed all the records: only in the first 4 months of the year 372 cases have been diagnosed. In general, the prevalence of contagion among men is overwhelming (nine out of 10), and among those in whom specialists have been able to determine a risk factor (not always possible), 62 percent were male homosexuals.For this reason, the Ministry of Health of Madrid has decided, apart from warning the health centers about this increase, to launch a media campaign , through various LGBT groups, focused on prevention measures. These recommendations recall the importance of an early diagnosis, since prophylaxis measures after exposure are only effective up to 14 days after the onset of symptoms (fever, nausea, lack of appetite). In addition, they emphasize the importance of hygienic measures, the use of condoms in sexual relations and vaccination.Vaccination is, without a doubt, the most effective method to avoid contagion. But at the moment there is a global lack of immunization against hepatitis A. ""The problem is that 2 or 3 multinationals are copying production worldwide, so when one of them has a production or distribution issue, everyone is affected. As now, ""explains the General Director of Public Health, who insists, in any case, that the vaccine is expected to be available in the summer and that, in the meantime, there are reservations to deal with the most urgent situations, this is, the close contacts of the affected cases and ways to manage the outbreaks.[Byline: J. A. AuniÌ n]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Because of specific sexual practices, men who have sex with men (MSM) are known to have a higher risk of acquiring hepatitis A and, if not vaccinated in childhood, should be immunized if found to be anti-HAV negative.The recommendations for HAV vaccination in susceptible adults from ACIP [U.S. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices] are:""Vaccinate any person seeking protection from hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection and people with any of the following indications: - Men who have sex with men; - people who use injection or non-injection illicit drugs; - people working with HAV-infected primates or with HAV in a research laboratory setting; - people with chronic liver disease and people who receive clotting factor concentrates; - people traveling to or working in countries that have high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A; and - unvaccinated people who anticipate close personal contact (such as household or regular babysitting) with an international adoptee during the 1st 60 days after arrival in the United States from a country with high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A. The 1st dose of the 2-dose hepatitis A vaccine series should be administered as soon as adoption is planned, ideally 2 or more weeks before the arrival of the adoptee.""This post implies that the HAV vaccine may be in short supply but at least in the USA, it seems to be available <https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/clinical-resources/shortages.html>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/53751>.]
