Fosters [edited]<http://www.fosters.com/news/20170514/powassan-virus-making-appearance-in-nh>Although there have been only 2 cases confirmed by the Centers for Disease Control in New Hampshire, Powassan virus, spread by ticks, as is Lyme disease, is of great concern to health professionals.State Epidemiologist Dr Benjamin Chan said Powassan virus has the potential to cause permanent neurological damage to an affected person and is being watched carefully.According to information on the CDC website, Powassan, also called POW is one of a group of arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) that can cause inflammation of the brain (encephalitis). Statistics on the site show that between 2006 and 2015, Massachusetts had 8 cases, Maine had 2 and New Hampshire had one.""In 2016, we had a 2nd confirmed case in Rockingham County,"" Chan said. ""It is not a common disease here and not commonly tested for. If a clinician suspects Powassan, they would request a test from public health and it would be sent to the CDC. There is no specific test but they can do antibody testing, [or PCR] looking for specific genetic material.""Approximately 75 cases of POW virus disease were reported in the United States over the past 10 years. Most cases have occurred in the Northeast and Great Lakes region in late spring, early summer or fall, when ticks are most active.""Powassan [virus infection] more mimics the mosquito-borne illnesses, like West Nile virus and equine encephalitis, so it's odd coming from a tick,"" said Dr Antonia Altomere, infectious disease and international health expert at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center. ""There are so many diseases transmitted by ticks that we know of that I have to wonder what else is there.Chan said Powassan [virus infection] has the potential to be very serious because it can cause permanent neurological damage. ""It can cause meningitis or encephalitis affecting the brain and spinal cord fluids,"" Chan said. ""The CDC estimates that about half the cases result in permanent neurological symptoms. It is rare but we are watching it because it can be a very bad disease.""Signs and symptoms of infection can include fever, headache, vomiting, weakness, confusion, seizures and memory loss. Long-term neurological problems may occur.""There is no specific treatment,"" Altomere said, ""but people with severe POW virus illnesses often need to be hospitalized to receive respiratory support, intravenous fluids or medications to reduce swelling in the brain.""""There is no blood test for Powassan,"" Altomere said. ""Part of figuring it out are the symptoms, but a clinician would also look at the area, and at what might be endemic here when a patient presents with a syndrome consistent with the disease.""The incubation period for the disease is about one week to one month. Many people who become infected with POW virus do not develop any symptoms. Symptoms can include fever, headache, vomiting, weakness, confusion, loss of coordination, speech difficulties and seizures.Powassan virus tick transmission occurs almost immediately, Itkin said. He said it can happen with a tick embedded for an hour or less and 10 percent of those affected will have permanent neurological damage of varying degrees.Preventing this disease means preventing tick bites and doing vigilant checks for ticks whenever you are outside. Use tick repellents, wear long sleeves and pants, and avoid bushy and wooded areas.""The best way to remove a tick is to pick it up by the head and pull it straight out,"" Altomere said. ""The sooner you find it the better your chance is to avoid a disease.""[Byline: Karen Dandurant]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Althouth the above report is a warning, rather than a case report, it is timely, as the season for tick activity is just now beginning in the northeastern USA. There is no commercially available vaccine for Powassan virus. The best way to prevent infection is to avoid tick bites. The tick involved in the 2016 cases was not identified, but may have been the black-legged tick _Ixodes scapulars_. The USA CDC notes: ""Human Powassan (POW) virus infections have been recognized in the United States, Canada and Russia. In the United States, cases of POW virus disease have been reported primarily from northeastern states and the Great Lakes region. These cases occur primarily in the late spring, early summer and mid-fall when ticks are most active. POW virus disease cases are rare but the reported number of cases has increased in recent years. All residents of and visitors to areas where POW virus activity has been identified are at risk of infection. People who engage in outdoor work and recreational activities in endemic areas are at increased risk of infection"" (<http://www.cdc.gov/powassan/statistics.html>). - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/231>.]
