The Express Tribune [edited]<https://tribune.com.pk/story/1411613/epidemic-like-situation-chickenpox-claimed-19-lives-year-confirms-health-dept/>Punjab is in the midst of a chickenpox epidemic as at least 19 deaths have been reported from Faisalabad's hospitals thus far in 2017.According to the health department, 1591 cases of chickenpox have been reported in Punjab, of which 821 were from Faisalabad district alone. In Lahore, 86 cases were reported, while there were 6 in Chinot, 11 in Nankana Sahib, 189 in Toba Tek Singh and 185 in Sahiwal. In Gujaranwala and Multan, one case from each city was reported.Minister for Primary and Secondary Healthcare Commission Khawaja Imran Nazir revealed these statistics as he spoke to the press on [Tue 16 May 2017].He said according to health department data, 19 deaths were reported in Faisalabad, however, he did not mention that chickenpox had become an epidemic over the year.He added several cases were being reported from different districts of the province. Regardless, he seemed satisfied with the situation as he stated that only 4 cases in Lahore and 5 cases in Faisalabad were reported more recently.Telling the media about steps taken by the department, he said health CEOs of all districts were strictly ordered to monitor the chickenpox situation and provide vaccines to patients.He said besides sending SMS alerts, the health department also planned to include communicable disease awareness courses in the school curriculum. ""This will include a chapter on the awareness of communicable diseases will be a great help to curb the menace,"" he remarked.He further defined the strategy that the Punjab Information Technology Board (PITB) has been directed to share the data of the disease with media so that people could also be aware of the real situation.""We have started a mass awareness campaign in the affected districts and special health education sessions were held in schools. Moreover, advertisements have also been published to create awareness among people,"" he added.How does the disease spread?Dr Qazi Mumtaz, a senior pediatrician, told The Express Tribune that chickenpox was a highly contagious disease and could spread through saliva, mucus or contact with the blisters of an infected person.""The virus can also be transmitted through the air by coughing or sneezing,"" he added. Dr Qazi said chickenpox was caused by the varicella-zoster virus.It spreads easily from people with chickenpox to others who have never had the disease or been vaccinated.He further said though chickenpox was a common disease among children, the virus had a terrible effect on adults too. ""The disease can lead to death due to co-morbidity,"" he said.The doctor stressed patients with symptoms of high fever, rashes on the body; vomiting and stiffness in the neck should immediately be referred to a hospital for proper treatment.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Date: Wed 17 May 2017Source: The News [edited]<https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/204876-Chickenpox-cases-decreasing>Punjab Primary and Secondary Health Minister for Kh Imran Nazir has said chickenpox situation has normalized in the province and a very few cases are reported in different areas in these days.He said a significant downtrend of the disease is noted. He stated this while addressing a press conference at Committee Room of Primary and Secondary Health Department Birdwood Road on Tuesday [Tue 16 May 2017].Special Secretary Dr Faisal Zahoor, Additional Secretary (Technical) Specialized Healthcare Dr Salman Shahid, Additional Secretary Primary Health Dr Asim Altaf and other officers concerned were present in the press conference.The minister said during the current season 1591 cases of chickenpox have been reported in Punjab out of which the largest number of cases reported in Faisalabad, 821 and 86 from Lahore.He said satisfactory arrangements of treatment have been made in tertiary care hospitals and provincial level monitoring was conducted.Kh Imran Nazir said two weeks back the intensity of chickenpox disease in Faisalabad division was very high, however, both the health departments made effective measures and the ministers of Specialized Health and Primary Healthcare held meetings on daily basis to review the situation for ten days regularly and all the chief executive officers of the affected districts were also taken on board and daily report sought from them regarding the situation.The minister said Special Secretary Specialized Healthcare Dr Sajid Chauhan personally visited Faisalabad to review the situation. He participated in an awareness seminar arranged by the Punjab Medical College for health providers.He said Health Department constituted a committee of senior professors for mortality audit of these deaths.He disclosed that chickenpox has been declared as notify-able disease therefore private hospitals and practitioners have to report chickenpox cases to the Health Department.Special Secretary Health Dr Faisal Zahoor said Health Information Management System has been placed in the department through which data of all such diseases is being gathered in the department.At present 15 000 doses of chickenpox vaccine are available in the stock of the department while vaccination of all the people concerned had already been carried out. ""The chief executive officers of the affected districts have been directed to remain vigilant and continue monitoring the situation,"" he added.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Chickenpox is a very contagious disease caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV). It causes a blister-like rash, itching, tiredness, and fever. The rash appears 1st on the stomach, back and face and can spread over the entire body causing between 250 and 500 itchy blisters. Chickenpox can be serious, especially in babies, adults, and people with weakened immune systems. The best way to prevent chickenpox is to get the chickenpox vaccine.Data on the number of chickenpox (varicella) outbreaks that occur each year in various parts of Pakistan are lacking and therefore international vaccine recommendations must be followed until national guidelines are developed. In general though vaccination of children in the areas where cases are concentrated would be a 1st important step to break the chain of infection.It is also important to evaluate with laboratory diagnostic support, whether some of these cases had been co-infected with measles virus, as the routine immunization coverage for measles also remains low in the country. This has been documented, when incidence of both measles and chickenpox infections are high in the populations [1-2]. - Mod.UBAReferences:1.Biswas D, Yadav K, Borkakoty B, Mahanta J. Simultaneous infection of measles and varicella-zoster virus in a child in India. J Med Virol. 2011;83:2004-7.2. Merigan TC, Waddell D, Grossman M, et al. Modified skin lesions during concurrent varicella and measles infections. JAMA. 1968;204:333-5.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/941>.]
