All Africa [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201705170076.html>A total of 7 out of the 8 patients who were last week admitted at Thika Level 5 hospital bearing symptoms of anthrax have been discharged from the hospital. Kiambu Director of medical services and Thika Level Five's medical superintendent Dr Jacob Toro confirmed adding that the 8th patient is recovering and in stable condition but being monitored. ""We are cleaning his wounds and monitoring his progress but we can confirm that he is in stable condition. There is no cause for alarm, we have had no further admissions since Wed [10 May 2017] last week,"" said Dr Toro.Preliminary investigations have shown that the 8 meat transporters had come into contact with a carcass outside Thika town's public slaughter house. However, the abattoir was closed on Wed [10 May 2017] over fears that the 8 may have visited the place and contaminated it.Investigations--------------""We closed the slaughter house because the 8 are people who regularly transport meat from the slaughter house. Our fears were that they could have visited the slaughter house and contaminated it without our knowledge. We are yet to find out where the 8 transporters came into contact with the carcass,"" Kiambu director of veterinary services, livestock and fisheries development Dr Philip Ndarua said during a meeting attended by stakeholders at the closed Makongeni slaughter house. The police are investigating where the 8 allegedly slaughtered the infected animal whose carcass is yet to be found.He said the abattoir will be opened soon after they are through with vetting all the transporters that carry meat from the factory and disinfecting the entire facility -- both inside and outside. Plans are also in place to have the slaughter house fenced with a perimeter wall and 2 gates put in place to secure the compound.Inspected meat--------------""We know there are hundreds of people who depend on the slaughter house, even the county government is losing revenue. Our interest is in safeguarding all residents from harm,"" he said noting that at the moment, there's no cause for alarm.He called on Kenyans to be keen on the meat they buy from butcheries by checking if it has been inspected. ""One way of ensuring that is checking if the meat has been stamped, bearing some roller marks and the meat's inspection certificate that should be openly displayed at the butchery,"" cautioned Dr Tharwa. [Dr. Tharwa's identity is not given by the author. - Mod.MHJ]Currently, over 300 direct jobs have been halted with the closure of the only slaughter house in Thika constituency, which slaughters an average of 140 cows on weekends and an average of 50 during the week.Thika sub-county meat transporters chairperson Peter Murimi called on the relevant agencies to speed up investigations into the matter to enable immediate resumption of operations at the slaughter house. ""With the rising cost of living, a day's closure of the slaughter house has a huge effect on families that depend on it for livelihood,"" said Mr. Murimi.Ramadhan Kamau, a butchery owner at Thika town said they are now sourcing for meat from neighboring slaughter houses in Makutano and Kabati. ""Our businesses have been affected. We closed some of our premises but we are grateful that all these efforts put in place are meant to prevent a spread of the disease,"" he said.[Byline: Mary Wambui]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There is a lesson in this: never assume the obvious when investigating an event. Because these 8 men worked at the slaughter house one assumed that's where they got infected. Logical yes, but not necessarily correct. This assumption would have had some strength if their cutaneous lesions had been on their shoulders, necks, and sides of the head, besides hands. Rather like in an outbreak many years ago in a British dock where the stevedores (cargo handlers and movers) had lesions on their shoulders and backs from unloading and heaving a shipment of sun-dried African hides -- believe me, sun-dried hides are sharp edged. But questioning the men appears to have revealed a more prosaic probable source, a shade-tree butchering of a dead cow. The good news is that this incident has sharpened the quality of the Thika meat inspection, and probably country-wide.Kiambu is northwest of Nairobi; see <http://www.fallingrain.com/world/KE/22/Kihingo.html>. Also see Wikipedia for Thika: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thika>. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/174>.]
