WHO Regional Office for Africa [edited]<http://bit.ly/2qwRICQ>Democratic Republic of Congo: external situation report 2---------------------------------------------------------Situation update----------------WHO continues to monitor the outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD) in Likati Health Zone, Bas Uele Province located in the north east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Between 15 May and 16 May 2017, 2 new suspected EVD cases were reported in Azande (1 case) and Nambwa (1 case) health areas in Lakati Health Zone. As of 16 May 2017, 21 suspected EVD cases including 3 deaths (case fatality rate of 14.3 percent) have been reported. Most of the cases presented with fever, vomiting, bloody diarrhoea, and other bleeding symptoms and signs. The cases have been reported from 4 health areas, namely Nambwa (13 cases and 2 deaths), Mouma (3 cases and 1 death), Ngayi (4 cases and no deaths), and Azande (1 case and no deaths).Two of 5 blood samples collected from the initial cases and analysed at the Institut National de Recherche Biom̩dicale (INRB) laboratory in Kinshasa tested positive for Zaire ebolavirus. Approximately 400 close contacts have been registered in Likati Health Zone and are being monitored.Current risk assessment-----------------------The risk is high at the national level due to the known impact of Ebola outbreaks, remoteness of the affected area, limited access to health care, and suboptimal surveillance.- Risk at the regional level is moderate due to the proximity of international borders and the recent influx of refugees from Central African Republic.- The risk is low at global level due to the remoteness and inaccessibility of the area to major international ports.The risk assessment will be revaluated by the 3 levels of WHO according to the evolution of the situation and the available information.WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on the Democratic Republic of the Congo based on the currently available information. WHO continues to monitor reports of measures being implemented at points of entry.WHO recommends the implementation of strategies that have proven to be effective in preventing and control of Ebola outbreaks. These strategies include (i) coordination of the response, (ii) enhanced surveillance, (iii) laboratory confirmation, (iv) contact identification and follow-up, (v) case management, (vi) infection prevention and control, (vii) safe burials, (viii) social mobilization and community engagement, (ix) logistics, (x) risk communication, (xi) vaccination, (xii) partner engagement, (xiii) research, and (xiv) resource mobilization. ...moreThis Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was notified to WHO by the Ministry of Health on 11 May 2017. The cluster of cases and deaths of previously unidentified illness have been reported since late April 2017. Likati Health Zone shares borders with 2 provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and with the Central African Republic (Fig. 1). The affected areas are remote and hard to reach, with limited communication and transport networks.
