CBS Sacramento News [edited]<http://sacramento.cbslocal.com/2017/05/18/gas-station-nacho-cheese-sauce-linked-to-botulism-outbreak/>Outside, Valley Oak Food and Fuel in Walnut Grove is open for business. But inside, health officials have stopped the sale of food items and roped off a part of the store, after the gas station was linked to last week's [5 May 2017] botulism outbreak -- a rare and sometimes fatal form of food poisoning. Health inspectors have linked the case to a nacho cheese sauce traced back to the mom-and-pop gas station.State and county health officials have confirmed 9 people have been hospitalized, including possibly a 16-year-old. 5 cases were first reported on 5 May 2017. This week 4 more people have become sick. And now, a 10th person is being tested after showing similar symptoms related to the rare and potentially fatal illness.""From the preliminary testing of the cheese, it was positive for botulism,"" said Dr Oliva Kasirye, a health inspector with the Sacramento County Public Health Department, who has been part of the on-going investigation.Now that the source of the outbreak has been determined, the investigation will turn to the cause. Did the gas station mishandle the food items? Or, are the manufacturers or distributors at fault? But a bigger concern may be to keep more people from getting sick, as all 9 patients hospitalized are in serious condition.According to the CDC, botulism is caused by a toxin produced by bacteria. Symptoms include blurry vision, slurred speech, muscle weakness, and difficulty swallowing. ""But if there are any muscles that have been paralyzed from the toxin, it's not reversed by the anti-toxin. That's a process that could take time and that's why the recovery is very slow,"" explained Dr Kasirye. And even with the anti-toxin treatment, there is no guarantee patients will fully recover.Another concern is the gas station is on a busy road that's not just used by locals, but many people who come out fishing or who pass-by as they travel through the state. The gas station is a frequent stop. So, health officials are not ruling out the possibility that there still may be more cases reported.Many in the small town are not faulting the gas station owners. Many say they will wait for the state's complete report and hope that it is completed soon.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[With so many of those involved being hospitalized, it is likely that serotype A is involved, which tends to cause more severe and longer disease. The possibility of cases occurring outside the area is significant since the food was from a gas station. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/60288>.]
