The Courier [edited]<http://www.thecourier.com.au/story/4672621/call-for-calm-on-rash-spread/>A leading Ballarat emergency doctor has quelled rising community concern for hand, foot and mouth disease. The call comes after multiple parents have contacted The Courier about cases in primary schools and childcare centers across the city.While the condition is highly contagious, Dr Nigel Beck said the key message was the name tended to spark worry for what was mostly fairly benign.Hand, foot and mouth disease is not notifiable to the health department. It is also confused to the unrelated foot and mouth disease, which infects animals.Dr Beck, who is Ballarat Health Services Base Hospital emergency department deputy director, said part of the challenge was children were often not particularly sick, more in discomfort, and it was best to see a general practitioner for treatment.""Because there is no immunization schedule for hand, foot and mouth, this is one of the few remaining ones that tends to cause outbreaks,"" Dr Beck said.""One of the unusual things is that because the rash forms early in the virus, and it's very specific where it forms, naming it hand, foot and mouth disease helps doctors remember and quickly identify it, rather than using the medical term.""Hand, foot and mouth disease tends to spread among children aged under 5.There is no set quarantine period for affected children, or their families, but Dr Beck said like other viral diseases, children should be kept home until blisters have dried.The lesions are predominantly found on the soles of feet, in palms and inside the mouth. Fluid in the blisters is infectious, as is other bodily fluids.Most incidents of the disease are in summer and autumn, according to the Victorian Health Department, with an incubation period of 3 to 7 days. Symptoms can persist for up to 10 days.Tips to prevent spreading hand, foot and mouth disease - exclusion from school/child care until all blisters have dried - covering lesions on hands and feet, if possible, and allowing them to dry naturally - avoiding piercing lesions, as the fluid within the blisters is infectious - good hand washing and cleaning and disposal of soiled articles - avoiding close contact or sharing eating and drinking utensils[Byline: Melanie Whelan]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[There are no case numbers in this report, but it suggests a small outbreak of the disease.HFMD is a common viral illness that usually affects infants and children younger than 5 years old. However, it can sometimes occur in older children and adults. It usually starts with a fever, reduced appetite, sore throat, and a feeling of being unwell (malaise). One or 2 days after the fever starts, painful sores can develop in the mouth, often in the back of the mouth, as small red spots that blister and can become ulcers. A skin rash with red spots, and sometimes with blisters, may also develop over 1 or 2 days on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet; it may also appear on the knees, elbows, buttocks or genital area. Dehydration may occur because blisters in the mouth create pain with swallowing. Some people, especially adults, may show no symptoms at all, but they can still pass the virus to others. (Excerpted from CDC) A map of Victoria, Australia may be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/288>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/4057>.]
