El Espanol [in Spanish, trans. KS, edited]<http://www.elespanol.com/ciencia/salud/20170516/216478876_0.html>A couple has died today in Villafruela, a village in Burgos with 197 inhabitants. The woman, 56, sounded the alarm after the death of her husband, 54, and succumbed hours later without being able to do anything at the University Hospital of Burgos.The Judicial Police of the Civil Guard continues at this time collecting samples and investigating the causes of what happened, although everything points to an ""inadequate use"" of phytosanitary products that caused an aluminum phosphide poisoning. Last [Fri 12 May 2017], these compounds against moths were applied in a house near the marriage.Aluminum phosphide, also used against rats, is very dangerous because when combined with ambient humidity it is converted to phosphorus gas (also called phosphine). According to EFE, this gas could have been transferred through the underground cellars of the houses, which are connected, and from there leaked to the residence of the couple.Even in very small concentrations (less than 1 percent) phosphine is highly poisonous, as it combines with oxygen and, when inhaled, destroys tissues causing irreparable damage to the respiratory system.As stated by the mayor of Villafruela, Alberto Alvaro Moreno, the marriage was indisposed throughout the weekend. The Civil Guard keeps sealed both houses and has evicted 7 other houses in the municipality.Aluminum phosphide has made headlines 3 years ago, when 3 members of a family from AlcalÌÁ de Guadaira (Seville) died suddenly from contact with this gas. A 13-year-old boy was hospitalized in time and saved his life.These types of biocidal compounds are legal in the European Union, although their use is very restricted. [Byline: Antonio Villarreal]--Communicated byKathryn Soderholm<kathryn.soderholm@gmail.com>[Aluminum phosphide (AlP -- Al is for aluminum and P is for phosphide) is a highly toxic, low cost, effective, and commonly used pesticide, a fumigant for control of insects and rodents. It is primarily used for indoor fumigation of raw agricultural commodities, animal feeds, processed food commodities, and non-food commodities in sealed containers or structures, and for outdoor fumigation of burrows to control rodents and moles in non-domestic areas, non-cropland, and agricultural areas.Aluminum and magnesium phosphide are formulated as tablets, pellets, impregnated materials and dusts. Aluminum and magnesium phosphide are restricted use chemicals. The use by certified pesticide applicators with respect to rodent control for burrows at least 15 feet (4.6 m) from a residential structure is considered a residential use.Aluminum and magnesium phosphide react with moisture in the atmosphere to produce phosphine gas, which is the substance that is active as a pesticide. It liberates lethal phosphine gas when it comes in contact either with atmospheric moisture or with hydrochloric acid in the stomach. The release of phosphine gas from AlP is immediate when mixed with aqueous solutions, such as water, and leads to rapid absorption through the lungs and gut when swallowed. Its gaseous form and toxicity makes it a potential agent for chemical terrorism.Unfortunately AlP is now one of the most common causes of pesticide poisoning among agricultural workers.The mechanism of toxicity includes cellular hypoxia due to the effect on mitochondria, inhibition of cytochrome C oxidase, and formation of highly reactive hydroxyl radicals. The signs and symptoms are nonspecific and instantaneous.The toxicity of AlP particularly affects the cardiac and vascular tissues, which manifest as profound and refractory hypotension, congestive heart failure, and electrocardiographic abnormalities. The diagnosis of AlP usually depends on clinical suspicion or history, but can be made easily by the simple silver nitrate test on gastric content or on breath. Due to no known specific antidote, management remains primarily supportive care.Aluminum and magnesium phosphide are in Toxicity Category I, the highest (most toxic) of 4 categories, for acute effects via the inhalation route. No significant exposure to phosphine gas is expected via dermal routes, although rarely dermal absorption has been the route of lethal exposures. The Environmental Protection Agency does not believe that aluminum and magnesium phosphide pose a carcinogenic concern.Histopathological findings of vital organs were found to be suggestive of cellular hypoxia. Myocardial muscles in non-survivors showed myocyte vacuolation, areas of myocytolysis and degeneration. Histological changes on human brain showed disorganization of the different layers, paucity of glial cells, degeneration of neurons, and appearance of necrotic patches. In other organs like in lung, diffuse vessel injury with edema and atelectasis; in liver, centrilobular necrosis; and in kidney, tubular degeneration findings may be present.The permissible exposure limit of phosphine is less than 0.3 ppm in the working environment and levels greater than 50 ppm are dangerous to life, while at 400-600 ppm it is lethal within half an hour. Individuals working in the manufacturing facility of AlP or methamphetamine (phosphine is a by-product), engaged in placing AlP tablets on the stacks of grains, and in the vicinity of application are at risk for unintentional exposure of phosphine gas, with few reported fatalities.Cases have existed in animals fed grain that was exposed to phosphine tablets but not allowed to sit for long enough prior to being fed to the animals. Animals have died in all of these cases.This is a very sad and tragic situation. What remains as an unanswered question is are those who apply this phytosanitary product trained in where and how to apply it? Or is this a case of no one checked to see if the dwelling was occupied? Parts of this comment were extracted from <https://www3.epa.gov/pesticides/chem_search/reg_actions/reregistration/fs_PC-066501_1-Dec-98.pdf> and <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2564148/>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/34604>.]
