The Independent [edited]<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/health/hepatitis-e-brexit-virus-barbecue-warning-sausages-10-per-cent-nhs-health-ill-doctors-a7748701.html>As Britain basks in its warmest weather since September 2016, barbecue-goers have been warned to check their meat is properly cooked to avoid a mutant strain of hepatitis E found in one in 10 sausages. The bug has been dubbed the ""Brexit virus"" as it is believed to come from pig farms in France, Holland, Germany and Denmark.More than 60 000 people in Britain are reportedly experiencing flu-like symptoms each year after being infected with a new strain of the virus, which led to serious illness for 3 times as many people in 2016 than in 2010. [It is unclear where the 60 000 number is derived from - Mod.LL]. Data from Public Health England shows 368 people in 2010 contracted the liver disease, which can cause vomiting, jaundice and fever - jumping to 1244 in 2016.According to the Food Standards Agency, 93 percent of British pig herds are now infected with hepatitis E, with 6 percent producing the virus in levels high enough to infect humans, reported The Sunday Times.A 61-year-old from Falmouth in Cornwall, told the newspaper he had been left partially paralyzed by a serious case of the disease, which attacked nerves in his armpits and diaphragm. ""Doctors traced the strain to salami, probably from Holland. It is cured, not cooked, and the virus survives in the fatty bits,"" he said.Andrew Langford, chief executive of the British Liver Trust, told The Independent hepatitis E can ""have a devastating effect, especially for people in poor health or with existing liver conditions. We know that it does exist in meat products. It's not the same sort of virus as hepatitis C or B, but it's still something we should be really worried about, particularly regarding how we cook our meat, making sure pork products are being cooked properly to kill the virus.""Gastroenterologist Dr Harry Dalton told a conference last week [week of Sun 14 May 2017] hepatitis E has become a major threat, according to The Sunday Times.The liver disease is widespread in the developing world and can be passed from person to person in places with poor sanitation. Experts have warned the virus is present in one in 10 sausages and processed pork meat products sold in England and Wales, recommending sausages be cooked for 20 minutes and reach 70C [158 F] internally.[Byline: Katie Forster]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Of the 4 recognized genotypes of hepatitis E, types 3 and 4 are zoonotic pathogens. The following is in part derived from Pavio N, Meng X-J, Renou C: Zoonotic hepatitis E: animal reservoirs and emerging risks. Vet Res 2010; 41(6): 46. doi: 10.1051/vetres/2010018; <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2865210/>:The particularity of HEV is that, among all known major hepatitis viruses (A, B, C, D and E), HEV is the only one with certain genotypes (3 and 4) with animal reservoirs. Swine HEV was 1st isolated and genetically characterized from pigs in the USA in 1997, even though HEV antibodies and RNA were reportedly detected from pigs in the Kathmandu Valley of Nepal, but the identity of the virus infecting the Nepalese pigs was not determined in that study. More recently, an avian HEV was identified and characterized from chickens with Hepatitis-Splenomegaly (HS) syndrome in 2001 in the USA as well. Besides swine and chickens, recently strains of HEV have been genetically identified from deer, mongooses, rabbits, and rats.Accumulating evidence indicates that hepatitis E is a zoonotic disease, and swine (and likely other animal species) are reservoirs. Swine and human strains of HEV are genetically closely related and, in some cases, indistinguishable, and direct transmissions through the consumption of contaminated food products such as pork have been reported in Japan. Thus, zoonotic transmission of hepatitis E raises an important public health concern over food safety and zoonotic risk. Extra hepatic complications of HEV infection include acute pancreatitis, Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome, hemolytic anemia due to glucose phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, severe thrombocytopenia, glomerulonephritis, and mixed cryoglobulinemia. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>.]
