The Courier Herald [edited]<http://www.courierherald.com/news/hepatitis-c-infections-spike-from-opioid-epidemic-tacoma-pierce-county-health-department/>Viral hepatitis C may affect thousands of Pierce County residents. National Hepatitis Awareness month calls attention to the potentially deadly infection that can cause cirrhosis or liver cancer -- and how to avoid it.""Cases of acute and chronic hepatitis C in Pierce County are on a dramatic rise, especially among young people,"" said Kim Desmarais, Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department viral hepatitis coordinator. ""Before 2013, we saw up to 5 cases a year. Now we see up to 5 cases a month."" In response to the increase in cases, the health department works with medical providers and community partners to report, test, and manage patients with hepatitis C. The department also works to make sure these patients understand ways to stop the spread of the virus, and find treatment options for hepatitis and drug addiction. Injection drug use spreads hepatitis C.Reports the Health Department receives of new hepatitis C cases are just the tip of the iceberg. Many with the infection may not know they have it. The Health Department estimates the new cases reported monthly in Pierce County represent fewer than 10 percent of the actual total. According to the CDC, as many as 3.9 million Americans have hepatitis C, but only half know they're infected. The number of people who have had hepatitis C for a long time but are just now finding out has increased because of a recommendation for doctors to routinely test people in the baby boomer generation.Heroin and other illegal injection drug use are factors in the nationwide increase of hepatitis C cases, according to the CDC. Shared drugs and syringes spread the infection. In a 2015 survey, the University of Washington Alcohol and Drug Abuse Institute asked 77 needle exchange participants in Pierce County (referenced in the Opioid Trends for Pierce County Report) which drugs they injected. The majority (74 percent) said heroin, 22 percent said methamphetamine. When the ADAI looked at survey results from 18 needle exchange programs in the state, including Pierce County, researchers found 69 percent injected heroin and 22 percent methamphetamine.Healthcare professionals can now treat and cure hepatitis C in as little as 8 weeks with very few side effects. In the past, medication was not as effective, took almost a year to work, and caused severe side effects. For these reasons, many patients decided not to take them. People with previously diagnosed hepatitis C should ask their doctor for a referral to a specialist who can evaluate them for the newer treatment.During May 2017, people can learn their exposure risk, the consequences if they don't get treatment and the importance of testing. May 19 is National Hepatitis Testing Day.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Pennsylvania - interventionsDate: Wed 17 May 2017Source: Governing Magazine/Tribune News Service, The Philadelphia Inquirer report [edited]<http://www.governing.com/topics/health-human-services/Hepatitis-C-Patients-Will-Receive-Treatment-Through-Medicaid-in-Pa.html>Under pressure from advocacy organizations that had threatened a lawsuit, the Wolf administration said [Tue 16 May 2017], that it would expand Medicaid coverage for treatment of hepatitis C, a major change that many states have put off over fear of spiraling costs. ""Today's announcement means that thousands of vulnerable Pennsylvanians will soon have easier access to pharmaceuticals that can cure hepatitis C,"" Department of Human Services Secretary Ted Dallas said in a statement.Until now, state policy had been to wait until patients showed signs of liver damage before approving treatment. Allowing earlier treatment was recommended 1 year ago by the department's Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee. As time passed without a decision, observers wondered whether the state was trying to determine how to pay for the highly effective but costly new drugs that have made hepatitis C a curable disease.New hepatitis C infections tripled in 5 years, the CDC reported last week, driven largely by the opioid epidemic. The bloodborne hepatitis C virus is easily spread by sharing needles to inject heroin or crushed prescription pain pills. But the virus can grow undetected for decades before causing chronic and sometimes life-threatening liver problems. An estimated 3 million Americans are living with chronic hepatitis C, about half of them undiagnosed. The new website HepVu estimated last month that 142 000 Pennsylvania residents are living with hepatitis C antibodies and 629 died of the disease in 2014, the latest estimates available. It said 91 000 New Jersey residents had antibodies and 446 had died that year.New drugs that can effectively cure hepatitis C with minimal side effects began coming on the market several years ago but, as they cost tens of thousands of dollars per patient, many states limited their use to those whose disease had shown up on liver tests, and added other restrictions -- barriers that exist for no other disease.""Hopefully, what this means is I no longer have to tell patients that their liver isn't sick enough,"" said Stacey B. Trooskin, an infectious diseases physician and director of viral hepatitis programs for Philadelphia FIGHT, a nonprofit health and social services organization. Trooskin said she likely had dozens of patients who would now qualify for coverage. She said that policymakers' fears that many Medicaid recipients would get tested and seek treatment were overblown. ""In reality, it will be more like a trickle,"" she said.Hepatitis C severity is categorized on a scale of F0 through F4, with F4 being the most severe. Previously, only patients with scores of F2 through F4 were eligible for treatment under Pennsylvania Medicaid unless they had other complications. Effective [1 Jul 2017], patients with scores of F1 will be covered, the state said in its announcement, and those with scores of F0 will be covered beginning [1 Jan 2018].About a dozen other states have loosened restrictions in the last few years, some under pressure from advocates. New Jersey eased its restrictions last year but only down to F2, which has not satisfied physicians or advocacy groups.In his statement, Dallas thanked several organizations, including Harvard Law School's Center for Health Law and Policy Innovation, for their help ""on finding a path forward"". The center has sued or threatened to sue several states to force decisions. It reached a settlement with Delaware in 2016.Kevin Costello, the center's litigation director, said that the ""overt threat of a lawsuit"" had kept the pressure on Harrisburg to approve the change. Costello said it was not likely to be nearly as costly as some have predicted. For that reason -- as well as the tendency to budget for the short term -- the possibility of future cuts to state Medicaid programs as Congress considers repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act probably was not a significant impediment to Pennsylvania's decision to drop restrictions on hepatitis C coverage, he said.The oft-quoted prices -- USD 84 000 for a typical 12-week course of Gilead Sciences' Sovaldi, for example -- have dropped with additional competition, Costello said, and state Medicaid programs have improved their negotiating tactics and applied substantial discounts. Indeed, a Gilead spokesman said in an email late [Tue 16 May 2017] that ""the average Medicaid price per bottle is now less than USD 10 000"" -- a total of USD 30 000 for 12 weeks -- ""for states that provide open access to all patients.""The Obama administration sent pointed letters to state Medicaid programs about requirements to cover treatment, and challenged pharmaceutical makers to lower prices.In Pennsylvania, about 3750 people infected with hepatitis C will likely be affected by the policy change, said Rachel Kostelac, a spokeswoman for the Department of Human Services. ""The state's annual contribution to the Medicaid program is approximately USD 12 billion. The fiscal impact of this policy change is well below one-half of 1 percent of the state's current costs,"" Kostelac said in an email response to questions.""The real problem here,"" said Gene Bishop, a retired internist and member of the advisory committee that recommended the change on 17 May 2016, is the pharmaceutical companies, which are charging ""outrageous prices for life-saving treatment."" Bishop made last the 2016 motion recommending that the state's Medicaid program cover treatment for all patients. It was supported by every practitioner on the committee and opposed by every member on the payer side, she recalled, adding that she had not expected the motion to prevail.[Byline: Don Sapatkin]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] MissouriDate: Wed 17 May 2017, 6:27 PMSource: KSHB [edited]<http://www.kshb.com/news/local-news/hepatitis-c-rising-in-kansas-city-with-opioid-epidemic-rediscover-says>The opioid epidemic in the United States is bringing about another serious problem: Hepatitis C. New data from the CDC shows new Hep C infections almost tripled in 5 years. New infections rose from 850 in 2010 to 2436 in 2015. It's taking a toll in the Kansas City metro, where ReDiscover says 1 in 5 people who walk into its opioid treatment clinic will be diagnosed with Hep C.One woman calls herself an old drug addict but is now using her story to help educate others. ""I remember the exact night I got Hep C,"" Duffel said. Her drug addiction was so powerful she picked up a heroin needle her infected husband had just used. ""The next minute I'm looking at the syringe thinking, I want that so bad, and I know if I use his needle, it was the only one, I would get Hep C,"" she said. ""I remember as I was pushing it in my arm I'm going, I'm sick. I'm going to be really sick. And I was."" She is one of millions of Americans who have Hepatitis C, a disease that destroys the liver.The face of this disease is getting younger and younger. Sarita Wise, a nurse at ReDiscover's drug treatment clinic, says the opioid epidemic is to blame. Since January 2017, out of 22 new clients at the clinic, 16 tested positive for Hep C. The CDC says the highest rates of Hep C are among young people who inject drugs, and the same group accounts for 75 percent of new Hep C cases a year.The disease is highly contagious. ""Dried blood, equipment used for making drugs, whether it's snorting it or with straws, tourniquets, cotton balls. If they're not aware there are even small amounts of blood on it, they can infect themselves that way,"" Wise said.Many of the patients that go to drug treatment clinics may be low-income and don't go to a primary care physician regularly, so the disease goes undetected. Wise says that's when it does real damage. ""I think that's why we're starting to see the trend in the opioid treatment programs because we're doing that initial screening up-front. That's also to educate them about why they should continue to come to our programs, so they won't engage in risky behaviors,"" Wise said.ReDiscover says while it is good news that young people are being diagnosed early on, many people, like this woman, can't afford the Hep C drug treatments. They can cost tens of thousands of dollars, but can also cure the disease. ReDiscover has to rely heavily on federal grants that can help people get access.[Byline: Sarah Plake]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Most cases of acute hepatitis C are not recognized or reported because they are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice) so the case numbers are likely underreported.In the absence of a vaccine for hepatitis C (as are available for hepatitis A and B), infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LLAn additional (public health) benefit of treatment is that patients who are cured no longer transmit hepatitis C. Thus treatment is also a form of prevention. - Mod.LMA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/227>.]
