Daily Times [edited]<http://dailytimes.com.pk/pakistan/23-May-17/cases-of-chickenpox-and-measles-on-the-rise-in-larkana> The sudden outbreak of the dangerous viral diseases measles and chickenpox in Larkana and Sukkur divisions has increased to the extent that 25 children were admitted in one day on [Sun 21 May 2017] at a private medical center in Larkana.During the last 2 months, as many as 116 affected children were admitted in Children's Hospital Larkana and Paeds Ward of Sukkur Hospital out of which as many as 25 children have died. In both these major hospitals, 25 to 30 children are brought daily to the OPD. It is believed that the viral diseases have turned into an epidemic due to a lack of proper EPI [Expanded Program on Immunization] vaccination.These diseases infect children aged between 1 to 6 years. In April 2017, as many as 37 cases were recorded and in [Mon 22 May 2017], 22 children were admitted to Children's Hospital Larkana. They were suffering from either measles or from chickenpox - out of these, 9 children died. In Sukkur Teaching Hospital, as many as 57 children were admitted during April and May [2017]. A total of 16 of these also died from their illness.Head of Paeds Medicine Department, Prof Saifullah Jamro, told media on [Mon 22 May 2017] that cases of measles and chickenpox are constantly rising and preventive measures should be adopted immediately. He reported that on Sunday alone, as many as 20 affected children were brought to his private clinic; which is evidence of the fact that these viral diseases are spreading very fast.Prof Jamro revealed that more than 15 cases daily arrive at Pano Akil, Saleh Patt and other nearby health facilities. He stated that if a child is suffering from measles and is also infected with chickenpox, then the situation becomes very tough - this is a majority of them losing their lives. He added that cases of pneumonia have also increased.To a question, Prof Jamro affirmed that the only preventive measure is proper vaccination for these infectious viral diseases. He believed the health department will have to take foolproof measures and gear up its vaccination teams. April and May are usually the season for these diseases.Another senior doctor revealed - on condition of anonymity - that the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) has lost the priority of the health managers and focus of the government has been shifted to eradication of polio as all the health workers are deployed for administering anti-polio drops throughout the province.Previously, vaccinators were assigned tasks to visit every area to carryout preventive vaccinations. As a result, the outburst was minimized but now these workers are directed to perform polio duties without fail.The same doctor further opined that efficacy of the preventive vaccines is also a big question mark because of worst electricity load shedding in Sindh and due to cold chain of storage from the store of District Health Office (DHO) to further down, including THQs, BHUs & RHCs, vaccination centers and then to the end users - which should also be looked into seriously. He further said that routine vaccination is made to prevent diseases like polio, tuberculosis, diphtheria, tetanus, Pertussis, hepatitis, pneumonia, measles and typhoid.[Byline: Jamal Dawoodpoto]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It seems that the number of Varicella (chickenpox) and Measles cases being reported from Sindh province is also on the rise after reports from Punjab (Varicella - Pakistan (03): (PB) RFI 20170519.5048428) and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (Pomed SoAs post: Measles - Pakistan (08): (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) outbreak alert 20170522.5053172). Both the viral infections are vaccine preventable and therefore can be controlled by active surveillance, case investigation and timely response measures.The following information was received from Epicore member requesting anonymity;'Khairpur Sindh: A total of 19 cases including 2 deaths were identified. Vaccination of 6 month to 10 years children with Vit-A supplementation was started in the area'Any further information in this regard will be highly appreciated. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/707>.]
