Daily Mail [summarised, edited]<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4529820/Woman-picks-rare-infection-cuddling-newborn-LAMB.html>A [23 y female] from Rhyl, North Wales, visited a farm in Denbighshire with her boyfriend on 8 Apr 2017 to see the lambs. She took videos and pictures of her cuddling one of the cute new arrivals - but 5 days later she started getting sharp pains in her thumb.Despite being given antibiotics by out-of-hours medical staff at Glan Clwyd Hospital, who said she had an infection called paronychia, her thumb became more swollen and a puss-filled blister formed.[The patient] ended up being admitted to hospital on Easter Monday, where she was then told she had contracted Orf disease. Now she is warning others of the dangers of an apparently harmless activity.""I was sick with the pain - it felt like my thumb was going to pop, "" she told the Daily Post Wales. ""The vein in my arm was bright red and the doctor said the infection had got into my blood. Next thing I knew I had about 9 doctors with masks on and they were taking pictures of my thumb. ""She was called in to see a surgeon the following day and her thumb had become so swollen local anesthetic didn't work and a decision was taken to operate to halt the infection's spread. ""They said they had never seen anything like it before, then they said I had to go to theatre,"" she continued. ""When I woke up in recovery the nurse said they'd drained it and shaved some of the bone off because it had become infected. They told me if I had left it another day it probably would have caused sepsis (blood poisoning).""Orf, also known as contagious pustular dermatitis, is a pox carried by sheep and goats and normally causes a lesion or mark which gets better on its own. In very rare cases it can form pustules on the skin which can require surgery to remove them.[The patient] is still taking antibiotics a month after her operation and needs 2 more steroid injections before she can be signed off by her doctor. ""I will never go near another lamb as long as I live, "" she said. ""I wouldn't wish it on my worst enemy - it was so painful. But I can't fault the treatment I had because they rushed me through. ""She also wants to spell out the dangers it could pose to children. She said: ""I want people to be aware of this. I was embarrassed about how it looked but children do go to petting zoos and handle sheep and goats and parents need to be aware.""What is orf disease?--------------------Orf is a viral skin disease that can be spread to humans by handling infected sheep and goats. In humans, the 1st sign of orf is a small, red, itchy or painful lump (lesion) that usually appears on the fingers, hands, forearms or face after an incubation period of 3 to 5 days. In some cases there may be more than one lesion.The lesion will usually be firm, red or blue in colour and 2-5cm in diameter. As the condition progresses over a 3- to 6-week period, a pustule or blister that weeps fluid will develop on top and eventually crust over. Other possible symptoms include a mild fever, general tiredness and enlarged lymph glands.Orf is a zoonotic disease (zoonosis), which means it can pass between animals and humans. It's not possible for humans to pass the virus on to each other.The virus is spread by handling infected sheep or goats, infected carcasses, or contaminated material. Handling infected animals near their mouth is thought to increase the risk of orf.Orf is a self-limiting disease, which means it will get better on its own without treatment. It usually clears up within 3 to 6 weeks.[Byline: Keiligh Baker]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The diagnosis of the described case was based upon circumstantial evidence and the clinical observations, and was most likely to be correct. Contagious ecthyma (CE, orf) can be confirmed by electron microscopy of fluid from the lesion; however, this technique cannot distinguish the orf virus from other parapoxviruses. Polymerase chain reaction assays can give a definitive diagnosis. Serology and the detection of viral antigens are not ordinarily used for diagnosis._Orf virus_, a member of the genus Parapoxvirus in the family _Poxviridae_, is the cause of contagious ecthyma (CE), a highly contagious zoonotic viral skin disease that affects sheep, goats and some other ruminants. CE has been found worldwide in all countries that raise sheep. In the United States, this disease is seen most often in the Western states.In animals, CE causes skin lesions which are painful and often occur on the mouth and muzzle (the so-called buccal form), where they can cause anorexia or even starvation. The initial signs are papules, pustules and vesicles, found on the lips, nose, ears and/or eyelids and sometimes on the feet or perineal region. Lesions can also occur inside the mouth, particularly in young lambs. The skin lesions eventually develop into thick, brown, rapidly growing scabs over areas of granulation, inflammation and ulceration. The scabs are often friable and bleed easily. Nursing lambs can transmit the virus to their dam, resulting in lesions on the teats and udder (genital form). Young animals may refuse to nurse. Foot lesions (podal form), the least common presentation of CE, are usually located on the pain-sensitive coronary bands causing transient lameness. Uncomplicated infections usually resolve in one to four weeks.Secondary bacterial infections can occur and, in rare cases, the lesions may extend into the internal organs. Although CE usually resolves spontaneously and the mortality rate is generally low, fatality rates up to 20 percent, mainly in offspring, have been reported.CE vaccines contain live virus prepared from dried scabs or propagated in tissue culture. The duration of immunity after vaccination is controversial; outbreaks have occurred in vaccinated animals, but vaccine breaks may be due to the virulence of the strain. The vaccine can infect humans. Recently vaccinated animals can also transmit infections to humans.In humans, CE is most common among people who are in close contact with sheep and goats, such as herders, sheep-shearers, veterinarians, butchers and abattoir workers. With the proliferation of petting farms and agrotourism in recent years, a steadily increasing number of infections in patients from urban background, particularly children, have been observed. Incomplete anamnestic inquiry of such patients may lead to misdiagnosis.Lesions of uncomplicated disease in humans heal, in most cases, spontaneously in 3 to 6 weeks without scarring. Secondary infections can occur but are rather rare. No deaths have been reported. Human-to-human transmission is nonexistent or very rare. Large lesions refractory to treatment can occur in people who are immunosuppressed. Unusually large lesions have also been reported in people with atopic dermatitis. Rare cases involving the eye, as well as a generalized vesiculopapular rash on the skin and mucosa, have also been reported. Possible complications include toxic erythema, erythema multiforme and bullous pemphigoid.Generally, when attending CE in humans, surgical approach deserves to be avoided as far as possible. Supportive, conservative treatment explicitly preferred. Pictures of clinical CE cases in animals and humans can be viewed at <http://tinyurl.com/mb28hgj>. - Mod.ASA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/281>.]
