Emerg Infect Dis.<https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/23/6/16-1884_article>ref: Urwin P, Thanigaikumar K, Ironside JW, et al. Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in 2 plasma product recipients, United Kingdom. Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(6). doi: 10.3201/eid2306.161884.-------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) has not been previously reported in patients with clotting disorders treated with fractionated plasma products. We report 2 cases of sCJD identified in the United Kingdom in patients with a history of extended treatment for clotting disorders; 1 patient had hemophilia B and the other von Willebrand disease. Both patients had been informed previously that they were at increased risk for variant CJD because of past treatment with fractionated plasma products sourced in the United Kingdom. However, both cases had clinical and investigative features suggestive of sCJD. This diagnosis was confirmed in both cases on neuropathologic and biochemical analysis of the brain. A causal link between the treatment with plasma products and the development of sCJD has not been established, and the occurrence of these cases may simply reflect a chance event in the context of systematic surveillance for CJD in large populations.[The authors conclude ""This report describes 2 cases of sCJD in patients with a history of treatment with UK-sourced plasma products, 1 with a history of hemophilia B and 1 with von Willebrand's disease. To our knowledge, no previous case of sCJD in a person with a history of extended exposure to plasma products has been reported. It is clearly of concern that there have been 2 such cases in a relatively short period in the UK, where many plasma product recipients have been informed that they are at increased risk for vCJD. However, a causal link between the treatment with plasma products and the onset of sCJD has not been established, and the occurrence of these cases may simply reflect a chance event in the context of systematic surveillance of CJD in large populations."" - Mod.UBA]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] UK biannual updateDate: Fri 10 Feb 2017Source: UK government Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) biannual update [edited]<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/creutzfeldt-jakob-disease-cjd-surveillance-biannual-updates/creutzfeldt-jakob-disease-cjd-biannual-update-february-2014-with-briefing-on-novel-human-prion-disease>This 6-monthly report provides an update on the enhanced surveillance of potential iatrogenic (healthcare-acquired) exposures to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). The data [are] correct as at [31 Dec 2013]. For numbers of CJD case reports, readers should consult data provided by the National CJD Research and Surveillance Unit (NCJDRSU).A briefing on a recently-identified human prion disease - variably protease-sensitive prionopathy - is also presented below;1. Monitoring of patients 'at increased risk' of CJD----------------------------------------------------Individuals who have been identified as at increased risk of CJD as a consequence of their medical care are informed of their exposure and asked to follow public health precautions to avoid potentially transmitting the infection to others. They are also followed up to help determine the risks of CJD transmission to patients through different routes and to ascertain whether any people who may have been exposed to increased CJD risks go on to develop CJD.Public health follow-up activities include clinical monitoring, general practitioner (GP) updates, and post mortem investigations to determine whether asymptomatic individuals in these groups have been infected with the CJD agent. Some individuals also provide blood or tissue specimens for research purposes. A number of different organisations are involved in these activities: Public Health England (formerly the Health Protection Agency), Health Protection Scotland (HPS), UCL Institute of Child Health/Great Ormond Street Hospital (ICH), NHS Blood and Transplant (NHSBT), National CJD Research and Surveillance Unit (NCJDRSU), National Prion Clinic (NPC), and the UK Haemophilia Centre Doctors' Organisation (UKHCDO).The PHE CJD Section coordinates the collation of data on individuals identified as at increased risk of CJD, and who have been informed of this. These individuals are followed up through public health monitoring and research activities by different organisations (table 1).The PHE CJD Section currently holds data on the following groups of 'at risk' patients:- recipients of blood components from donors who subsequently developed vCJD;- blood donors to individuals who later developed vCJD;- other recipients of blood components from these blood donors;- recipients of certain plasma products between 1990 and 2001 (non-bleeding disorder patients);- certain surgical contacts of patients diagnosed with CJD;- highly transfused recipients.The data from the UKHCDO are likely to be an underestimate of the true number of 'at risk' patients with bleeding disorders who received UK-sourced clotting factors, as there was incomplete reporting of identified 'at risk' patients by haemophilia centres to the UKHCDO database. Notified 'at risk' patients are given the option of removing their details from the UKHCDO database, and are then removed from the 'at risk' totals.The data on 'at risk' patients who received human-derived human growth hormone held by the ICH is a slight underestimate of the total as a small number of these patients are not included in the ICH follow-up. Includes table on summary of all 'at risk' groups on which data are collected (as at [31 Dec 2013]).2. Variably protease-sensitive prionopathy------------------------------------------Professor James W Ironside and Dr Mark W Head, The National CJD Research and Surveillance Unit, University of Edinburgh.Variably protease-sensitive prionopathy (VPSPr) is the most recently identified human prion disease, 1st described in the USA by Gambetti and colleagues in 2008 as ""a novel human disease with abnormal prion protein sensitive to protease"" [1]. Since then, similar cases have been identified in other countries; the National CJD Research and Surveillance Unit has identified 9 cases in the UK, 3 of which have been identified retrospectively and the others prospectively from samples and data collected since 1991 [2-6]. Other candidate cases are currently under investigation.Patients with VPSPr have no identified risk factors for acquired human prion disease and no associated mutations in the prion protein gene (PRNP) coding sequence have been found. In the original description a proportion of the patients had family histories of ill-defined dementia, but this has not been a feature in more recently identified cases [1,2,6]. VPSPr affects patients in the same age range as sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD), occurring mostly in patients over the age of 60. The clinical features are more varied than in sCJD and include movement abnormalities, cognitive decline and unsteadiness while walking. The clinical illness is longer than for sCJD; most patients survive for over a year before succumbing to the illness. Diagnostic clinical criteria are therefore difficult to establish, and further work is required on this topic since this disease is likely to be under-ascertained [2,6].Like sCJD, VPSPr occurs in all genetic groups defined by the polymorphism at codon 129 in the PRNP gene, ie MM, MV and MV. Unlike sCJD, there is a preponderance of the codon 129-V haplotype. VPSPr has distinctive neuropathological features, the most typical of which are microplaques that occur in a target-like arrangement and are particularly common in the cerebellum. These microplaques show differential staining with a panel of different anti-PrP antibodies, allowing a distinction from both the common sCJD VV2 and the rare sCJD VV1 subtypes [1,2,5,6]. The most distinctive and defining feature of VPSPr is the biochemistry of the abnormal prion protein in the brain, which is only poorly resistant to proteolytic digestion, yielding a low abundance, truncated 8kDa (approx) band in Western blot assays [1]. This fragment is often accompanied by a faint ladder of bands extending into the 18-30kDa range [1,2]. Some cases of VPSPr also show a sCJD-like pattern on Western blot analysis for abnormal prion protein, often in the cerebellum, suggesting molecular overlaps between VPSPr and sCJD [6,7].Further work is required to fully establish the epidemiology, clinical and pathological diagnostic criteria and transmission characteristics of VPSPr. The Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy (ACDP TSE) Subgroup concluded that until further research can demonstrate how transmissible VPSPr may be, it would be advisable to add this novel form of human prion disease to the infection control guidance for CJD and other related disorders.[For references please visit the original URL. - CopyEd.AO]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Latest CJD figuresDate: 1990-2017Source: The National CJD Research & Surveillance Unit (NCJDRSU)[edited]<http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/data-and-reports/latest-cjd-figures>These figures show the number of suspect CJD cases referred to the NCJDRSU in Edinburgh, and the number of deaths of definite and probable cases in the UK from [1 Jan 1990].Total referrals / Total Deaths: 3640 / 2284Summary of vCJD casesDeaths------Deaths from definite vCJD (confirmed): 123Deaths from probable vCJD (without neuropathological confirmation): 55Deaths from probable vCJD (neuropathological confirmation pending): 0Number of deaths from definite or probable vCJD (as above): 178Alive-----Number of definite/probable vCJD cases still alive: 0Total number of definite or probable vCJD (dead and alive): 178--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Human prion diseases are a group of rare and fatal neurodegenerative diseases that include idiopathic (sporadic), genetic (inherited), and acquired (infectious) disorders. All are associated with the accumulation of an abnormal isoform of the prion protein (PrPSc) in the central nervous system. The commonest human prion disease is the sporadic form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD), which occurs worldwide with a relatively uniform incidence of 1-2 cases per million population per year, a peak incidence in the 7th decade of life, and a median duration of illness of 4 months [Prusiner SB. Molecular biology of prion diseases. Science. 1991;252:1515-22. <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/252/5012/1515.long>].CJD (Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) is a rare illness and is one of a group of diseases called prion diseases, which affect humans and animals. Prion diseases exist in different forms, all of which are progressive, currently untreatable and ultimately fatal. Their name arises because they are associated with an alteration in a naturally occurring protein: the prion protein.CJD was first described in 1920. A new form of CJD (variant CJD) linked to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle was identified in 1996. There are also genetic forms of human prion disease linked to mutations of the prion protein gene and cases caused by infection via medical or surgical treatments (iatrogenic CJD) <http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/>. - Mod.UBA]
