relifweb, Radio Dabanga report [edited]<http://reliefweb.int/report/sudan/cholera-appears-north-kordofan-claims-lives-white-nile>Cases of cholera have appeared in the state capital of North Kordofan for the first time. The disease is spreading rapidly in White Nile state, where 7 people died in Kosti on [Sat 20 May 2017]. The hospital in El Obeid, capital of North Kordofan, received 38 cases of cholera. A medical source told Radio Dabanga that cholera infections appeared in the city 2 days ago. A total of 5 new cases that emerged in Karima district were transferred to the hospital, while 13 patients were transferred from El Wehda district.The cholera patients have been isolated in the dermatology ward. A medical source told Radio Dabanga that the patients are denied any visit. ""There is a sign with 'No entry, special cases' that prohibits entry of visitors.""On [Sat 20 May 2017], 7 people died of cholera in Kosti, in the south of White Nile state, where the cholera has spread into epidemic proportions. The Eye Hospital in the town has been turned into an isolation centre to accommodate the rising number of cases: currently 183 patients remain here, according to medical sources.""Most of the cases arrived from Block 54 in the western part of Kosti on [Mon 22 May 2017],"" a medical worker said. ""The health situation is very serious. New cases have emerged in El Duweim, Um Jar, and Abu Shibeika."" A school in Asalaya is transformed into an isolation centre for 126 people infected with cholera. Abdelrahman El Siddig, the head of civil society organisations in White Nile state, told Radio Dabanga that 1 person died of cholera on [Mon 22 May 2017].In September 2016, Radio Dabanga received reports about people stricken by ""acute watery diarrhea"" in Blue Nile state. Since then the deadly disease spread to other areas. The states of North and South Kordofan remained, according to reports from the field, unaffected.Though Sudanese medics have confirmed that the disease concerns cholera, federal health authorities continue to deny its presence. In April 2016, a journalist was detained in eastern Sudan for reporting about cholera.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[White Nile state in Sudan can be seen on this map:<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_Nile_(state)#/media/File:White_Nile_in_Sudan.svg>- Mod.LXL/LM]******[2] Diarrhea, fatal - India (Uttar Pradesh)Date: Sat 20 May 2017Source: The Times of India (TOI), Times News Network (TNN) [edited]<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/agra/ten-die-due-to-diarrhoea-outbreak-in-mathura/articleshow/58766082.cms>In a suspected outbreak of diarrhoea in Mat and Surir villages of Mathura, 9 children, between the age group of 1 and a half years to 12 years, and a 30-year-old woman have died in the last 3 days and over 150 have been admitted to hospitals. Though no deaths were reported on [Sat 20 May 2017], local administration have launched preventive steps to control further outbreak of diarrhoea in these and neighboring villages.Talking to TOI, Chief Medical Officer, RK Nayyar said that they have received reports of 10 diarrhea-related deaths, including that of a 30-year-old woman, from the villages but no deaths have occurred in any of the government health centres or hospitals. He said, ""We are working to find out the cause of deaths"" but he admitted that there has been a suspected diarrhea outbreak in about 22 villages in Surir, Mat and Naujheel areas.He said 9 teams of doctors have been formed and they are visiting these affected villages and so far 150 people have been admitted in the hospital. He said presently 40 were still undergoing treatment. Nayyar said samples of water were collected on [Fri 19 May 2017], after the first death was reported, and sent to Agra SN Medical College laboratory for culture. He said stool samples of patients have also been sent to Agra on [Sat 20 May 2017], and the state epidemiologist and microbiologist from Lucknow have also visited the villages.Dr Karan Singh, of Ohawa village in Surir area, where 2 deaths have been reported, said that a 1 and a half year old and a 11-year-old had died on [Thu 18 May 2017]. He said since the financial condition of the parents of the 2 children was not good, they delayed matters and took them to hospital only when their condition had deteriorated.A farmer who runs a NGO in village Deragaon told TOI that a 12-year-old died a couple of days back. He was not well but his parents were treating him at home only and he died. He said there are lots of problems in the village including non-availability of wash rooms and even the water supply is not good. He said even the water from hand pumps is dirty and salty. He added that the health department team visited the village and distributed medicines, besides advising people some precautionary measures.Talking to TOI, District Magistrate, Mathura, Arvind Malappa Banagari said that the administration was taking all precautionary measures to prevent further spread of diarrhoea and for the treatment of the patients. He said besides distribution of medicines, the teams are advising the villagers to use boiled water and avoid consumption of cut fruits and ice creams, made by substandard companies. He said since the majority of the causalities have taken place among the families of brick kiln workers, they are being advised not to use water from contaminated sources. He added that the Jal Nigam has been instructed to see that pumps discharging sub-standard water are stopped immediately and food inspectors have been instructed to shut these open makeshift shops and ice-cream vendors.[Byline: Anuja Jaiswal]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The etiology or etiologies of this outbreak is not clear but with fatalities occurring, the possibility of cholera must be considered. - Mod.LL]******[3] Diarrhea, dysentery - Nepal (Kathmandu)Date: Thu 18 May 2017 From: Anup Bastola <docanup11@gmail.com> [edited]A total of 118 cases of acute diarrhea and dysentery cases have been admitted from Kathmandu valley and have received treatment from the hospital since mid-March 2017. Most of them presented with watery diarrhea. Although few cases presented in shock cholera, hasn't yet been laboratory proven.The number of cases expected to increase in coming days because of ongoing raining and contamination of surface and ground water which is the common source of drinking water in many places in Kathmandu. Public awareness on hand hygiene and safe drinking water needed for prevention of major outbreaks.--Anup Bastola, MDSukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital, Teku, Kathmandu, Nepal<docanup11@gmail.com>[ProMED thanks Dr. Bastola for his post. The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness.As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press) oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea:""As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al. (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs. 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al. (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 percent to 3.6 percent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as ""potentially the most important medical advance"" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose- or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5).""The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref. 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.""References----------1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA and Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405.2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF and Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2.3. Gore SM, Fontaine O and Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhoea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91.4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK and Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205.5. Atia AN and Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329.6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhoea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/322>.]
