Eurosurveillance, Volume 22, Issue 21 [edited] <http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22805>HUS outbreak caused by sorbitol-fermenting Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (EHEC) O157, Germany, Dec 2016 to May 2017--------------------------------------------------------------------------------We report an ongoing, protracted and geographically dispersed outbreak of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and gastroenteritis in Germany, involving 30 cases since December 2016. The outbreak was caused by the sorbitol-fermenting immotile variant of Shiga toxin-producing (EHEC) _E. coli_ O157. Molecular typing revealed close relatedness between isolates from 14 cases. One HUS patient died. Results of a case-control study suggest packaged minced meat as the most likely food vehicle. Food safety investigations are ongoing.In February 2017, 5 cases of hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) were notified in Germany with onset of illness in week 5, 2017 [week 29 Jan to 4 Feb 2017], which constituted a marked increase compared with the mean in the same week of the previous 5 years (mean: 0.6; range: 0-2 cases). In parallel, the consultant laboratory (CL) for HUS at the University Hospital of MÌ nster detected Shiga toxin 2-producing (stx2) sorbitol-fermenting (SF) _E. coli_ (EHEC) O157:H- isolates in 4 HUS patients with disease onset between December 2016 and February 2017. We initiated an outbreak investigation to identify the cause of the outbreak, in order to control it.Epidemiological investigation-----------------------------SF _E. coli_ O157:H-, stx1-gene negative, stx2-gene positive, eae-gene positive was identified as the outbreak strain. As at 22 May 2017, 30 cases, including 1 family cluster (n‰Ûä=‰Ûä4), meet the outbreak case definition (Box): 14 confirmed, 1 probable and 15 possible cases have been reported. The outbreak is ongoing; the most recent symptom onset for a confirmed case was 13 Apr 2017 (Figure 1 [for figures and table, see original URL. - Mod.LL]).Case definition---------------Outbreak cases were defined as cases of HUS(*) or EHEC infection(**) with symptom onset starting on 1 Dec 2016, and residency in Germany.Confirmed cases were defined as cases of HUS or with EHEC infection, with laboratory confirmation of the outbreak strain via WGS base typing or PFGE: SF _E. coli_ O157:H-; stx1-gene negative, stx2-gene positive, eae-gene positive.Probable cases were defined as:- cases of HUS with laboratory confirmation of SF EHEC O157;- cases of STEC infection with laboratory confirmation of SF O157;- cases of HUS, EHEC infection or bloody diarrhea with an epidemiological link to a confirmed or probable case.Possible cases were defined as:- cases of HUS without any pathogen verification, or _E. coli_ without confirmation of SF characteristic, or with confirmation of _E. coli_ serogroup O157, excluding individuals with a laboratory test result conflicting with any characteristic of the outbreak strain, e.g. other serogroup;- cases of EHEC infection with _E. coli_ serogroup O157 laboratory confirmation;- cases of HUS, EHEC infection or bloody diarrhea with an epidemiological link to a possible case.(*) HUS is defined as at least 2 of the following 3 criteria: hemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia‰Ûä‰ä ‰Ûä15.000 cells/mm3 or renal impairment; or diagnosis of acute enteropathic HUS by a clinician, or death caused by HUS.(**) EHEC infection clinically defined.The 14 confirmed cases resided in the north-west of Germany and Berlin (Figure 2).The mean age of the confirmed cases was 8.5 years (range: 1-36), half of them were male, 13 developed HUS and needed intensive care treatment; 1 patient died. None of the cases had a relevant pre-existing illness. The probable case, a middle-aged adult, a EHEC enteritis case, was a close family member of 3 confirmed cases. A total of 12 of the 15 possible cases developed HUS and 3 had gastroenteritis; the mean age of the possible cases was 26 years (range: 0-83) and 7 were male.Explorative interviews----------------------We interviewed 11 of the confirmed cases or their parents using a standardized trawling questionnaire containing questions on clinical symptoms, travel history, animal contacts, farm visits, other leisure activities and food consumption during 10 days before symptom onset.During 11 explorative interviews, we identified a number of frequently named food items, e.g. minced meat (beef and pork mixed), hot dog-style (Vienna) sausages, as well as several commercially available yoghurts or puddings. Cases and parents also reported having frequently shopped at supermarket chain X. They reported no common place of exposure. None of the cases had travelled in Germany or abroad. Few had had contact with a dog or cat (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø4), 1 case had had contact with a donkey, a horse, a sheep, and a goat; 1 had consumed unpasteurised milk. None reported a farm visit or contact with cattle. This supported our initial hypothesis of a food-borne outbreak, which we had suspected based on biological plausibility and the wide geographical distribution of cases.Case-control study------------------Following the interviews we conducted a case-control study to investigate the association of illness with food items named frequently in the explorative interviews. For each confirmed case‰Ûäunder‰Ûä13 years of age, we recruited 3 to 6 children reported to the local health authorities with another notifiable disease (e.g. influenza), who lived in the same or a neighboring district as the outbreak case, and belonged to the same age group (1-4; 5-9; 10-12 years). Parents of cases and controls were interviewed by telephone after they had given informed consent. We used a short standardised questionnaire which covered the consumption of the above mentioned food items in the 10 days before symptom onset with details such as brand names, packaging, shopping places, etc.We analyzed the data using MS Excel and Stata 14.1 (Stata Corporation, Texas, USA), compared cases and controls by Chi-squared and Student t-test and estimated matched odds ratios (OR) for consumed food items and supermarkets using the Mantel-Haenszel test.We included 9 confirmed cases and 35 individually matched controls in the analysis. Cases and controls did not differ by sex and age; there was no association between being a case and having consumed different types of desserts (data not shown). Cases had eaten minced meat (beef and pork mixed) significantly more frequently than controls (Table). All cases (6/6) with the respective information reported this exposure. The parents of the cases prepared minced meat at home significantly more frequently than parents of the controls and they were significantly more likely to have purchased the minced meat at supermarket chain X (OR: 14.1; 95 percent confidence interval (CI): 1.2-174.9). However, only 3 of 8 cases were explained by this exposure and the CI was wide. Shopping mostly or exclusively at supermarket chain X was associated with a 3-fold odds for being a case (OR: 3.0; 95 percent CI: 0.8-11.4).Microbiological investigation-----------------------------The microbiological investigations at the National Reference Centre for Salmonella and other Bacterial Enteric Pathogens at the Robert Koch Institute (RKI, national public health institute) and the CL for HUS included serotyping, testing for Shiga toxins, other phenotypic and genotypic markers and molecular subtyping (PFGE and WGS). We applied a threshold of more than 10 alleles difference to securely exclude isolates from the outbreak [1]. Raw reads of the index case are available for download at <http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena> under the study accession number PRJEB20962.Molecular typing revealed close relatedness between isolates from 14 confirmed cases. The probable case had a PCR-positive stool sample sharing outbreak specific markers but culturing from stool was unsuccessful. Of the possible cases, all 3 EHEC enteritis and 4 of the 12 HUS cases were positive for EHEC O157, without any further typing. For the remaining 8 HUS cases, isolates were not available.Food safety investigations--------------------------State food safety authorities conducted inspections and sampling at minced meat producing plants supplying supermarket chain X and others. All results of official samples on production sites, retail level and from regional monitoring programs have been negative for SF EHEC O157 so far. Trace-back investigations starting from locations where cases had purchased minced meat or hot dog-style (Vienna) sausages are ongoing.Discussion-------------We report an ongoing, protracted and geographically dispersed outbreak of HUS and gastroenteritis in Germany caused by SF EHEC O157:H-. The supra-regional occurrence of cases makes a food item the most likely vehicle of transmission. Based on the investigations to date, we suspect packaged minced meat (beef and pork mixed) sold at one or several supermarket chains, as the most likely source. Other food items purchased at supermarket chains, in particular pre-packaged hot-dog style (Vienna) sausages, cannot be excluded as vehicle at this moment in time, but appear to be less plausible mainly for 2 reasons: less cases can be explained by this exposure compared to minced meat and the sausages are heated during the production process and therefore contamination appears less likely.SF EHEC O157:H- was first described in Germany in 1988 [2] and subsequently caused several outbreaks in Germany [3-5] and elsewhere in Europe [6,7]. SF EHEC O157 is characterized by a high pathogenicity [8,9]. One of the patients in the present outbreak died, and all 10 HUS cases whose parents were interviewed needed intensive care and dialysis. Few secondary gastroenteritis cases among family members were observed. Similarly to previously described outbreaks caused by SF EHEC O157, this outbreak spanned several months and cases were geographically dispersed [4,5].Little is known about the SF STEC O157 reservoir. In previous investigations, the pathogen was found in cattle and reindeer [10-12]. In other outbreaks, SF EHEC O157:H- infections were epidemiologically linked to the consumption of mortadella (Italian-style sausage) and smoked pork patÌ© [5] or to visiting one particular playground [3]. SF EHEC O157 was isolated from minced beef products in an outbreak involving 18 HUS cases in France in 2011 [6]. In an outbreak associated with a recreational farm visit in Finland in 2012, unpasteurized milk was the most likely vehicle and isolates from patients' stool samples, cattle and the farm environment were identical [7].At this point, investigations focus on minced meat as outbreak vehicle, although the available evidence is weak. The source of the contamination with SF EHEC O157 is so far unknown. For minced meat, contaminations at the farm, slaughterhouse or subsequent production steps, are all possible options. It is thus conceivable that several retail outlets may be concerned.One limitation in the investigation of this outbreak is that the number of interviewed confirmed cases is small and therefore, results of the case-control study should be interpreted with caution. For a number of HUS cases, no isolate was available and there was no opportunity of laboratory confirmation. In order to identify outbreak cases and allocate them appropriately, diagnostic laboratories and public health services are requested to send any EHEC isolate from HUS patients to a typing center. The use of genomic methods is desirable as routine for characterizing all isolates.A further limitation is that for a substantial proportion of cases, typing and interviews could not be conducted at all, or only weeks after symptom onset. Physicians, diagnostic laboratories, including national reference and consultant laboratories, public health and veterinary authorities at local, state and federal level, should be aware that timely actions are crucial for early detection of the vehicle and source.Several previous investigations into outbreaks with SF EHEC O157 have been unsuccessful in identifying the source, despite intensive efforts of health and food safety authorities [3-5]. This is the largest outbreak of SF EHEC O157 in Germany since 2002 [4] and it has lasted for more than 4 months already. We assume that the source of infection may still be active and further cases may still occur. According to the feedback obtained via the Epidemic Intelligence Information System (EPIS) of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), the German outbreak strain has not been detected in other European countries. In Germany, continued epidemiological investigations, sampling of food isolates and trace-back of food items are needed and ongoing to identify the cause of the outbreak.References-----------1. Mellmann A, Bletz S, BÌ¦king T, et al: Real-time genome sequencing of resistant bacteria provides precision infection control in an institutional setting. J Clin Microbiol. 2016;54: 2874-2881.2. Karch H, Wiss R, Gloning H, Emmrich P, Aleksi€à S, BockemÌ hl J: [Hemolytic-uremic syndrome in infants due to verotoxin-producing Escherichia coli]. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 1990;115: 489-495.3. Nielsen S, Frank C, Fruth A, et al: Desperately seeking diarrhoea: outbreak of haemolytic uraemic syndrome caused by emerging sorbitol-fermenting shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157:H-, Germany, 2009. Zoonoses Public Health. 2011;58: 567-572.4. Alpers K, Werber D, Frank C, et al: Sorbitol-fermenting enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H- causes another outbreak of haemolytic uraemic syndrome in children. Epidemiol Infect. 2009;137: 389-395.5. Ammon A, Petersen LR, Karch H: A large outbreak of hemolytic uremic syndrome caused by an unusual sorbitol-fermenting strain of Escherichia coli O157:H-.J Infect Dis. 1999;179: 1274-1277.6. King LA, Loukiadis E, Mariani-Kurkdjian P, et al: Foodborne transmission of sorbitol-fermenting Escherichia coli O157:[H7] via ground beef: an outbreak in northern France, 2011. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014;20: 1136-1144. 7. Jaakkonen A, Salmenlinna S, Rimhanen-Finne R, et al: Severe outbreak of sorbitol-fermenting Escherichia coli O157 via unpasteurized milk and farm visits, Finland 2012. Zoonoses Public Health. 2017. DOI: 10.1111/zph.12327 PMID: 28045227 8. Werber D, Bielaszewska M, Frank C, Stark K, Karch H: Watch out for the even eviler cousin-sorbitol-fermenting E. coli O157. Lancet. 2011; 377: 298-299. 9. Pollock KG, Locking ME, Beattie TJ, et al: Sorbitol-fermenting Escherichia coli O157, Scotland. Emerg Infect Dis. 2010;16: 881-882. 10. Orth D, Grif K, Dierich MP, WÌ rzner R: Sorbitol-fermenting Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157: indications for an animal reservoir. Epidemiol Infect. 2006;134: 719-723.11. Zweifel C, Fierz L, Cernela N, et al: Characteristics of Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli O157 in Slaughtered Reindeer from Northern Finland. J Food Prot. 2017;80: 454-458.12. Bielaszewska M, Schmidt H, Liesegang A, et al: Cattle can be a reservoir of sorbitol-fermenting shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157:H(-) strains and a source of human diseases. J Clin Microbiol. 2000;38: 3470-3473.[Authors: Vygen-Bonnet S, Rosner B, Wilking H, et al]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[As a review, the classical enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ is the O157:H7 serotype although some are non-motile, ie, H-.  Most O157 strains do not ferment sorbitol and that characteristic was used to screen for the strain using a sorbitol MacConkey agar. However, since non-O157 EHEC strains such as O26, O45, O103, O111, O121, and O145 do ferment sorbitol and, as seen here, some O157 also ferment sorbitol, laboratories now look for these isolates using genetic assays for the Shiga toxin genes.Around 1903 Smith and Reagh reported on the different behavior of salmonella strains. Their work was mostly ignored until Weil and Felix, working on _Proteus_ cultures, noted 2 forms, the swarming form called the H form (_mit Hauch_, in English: ""with breath"") and the non-swarming form, called the O form (_ohne Hauch_, in English: ""without breath""). The H form contained both O and H antigens (correctly termed the OH form). These parallels were transposed to other enterobacteriaceae.If O antiserum is added to a culture, motility is preserved, whereas if H antiserum is added the culture does not move. Therefore, H antigen was involved with swarming in the agar plate (breathing might have been used to imply the ability to move). (_E. coli_, of course, do not swarm on certain agar plates like _Proteus_ bacteria do). - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/101>.]
