All Africa, Radio Dabanga report [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201705250418.html>Cholera continues to spread in Sudan's eastern states, with more fatalities and infections reported across White Nile state, North Kordofan and Sennar. The federal authorities are beginning to respond, however Khartoum continues to refer to the outbreak as 'acute watery diarrhea'. The official Sudan News Agency (SUNA) reports that Sudan's First Vice-President and National Prime Minister, Lt. Gen. Bakri Hassan Salih, has given a directive to provide ""all necessary means for containing the watery diarrhea cases in the White Nile state through urgent and effective interventions"".Salih met with Minister of State for Health, Dr Ferdos Abdulrahman at the Republican Palace on [Wed 24 May 2017], to discuss health situations in the country and in the White Nile in particular and efforts of the Federal Ministry of Health in this connection.Dr Abdulrahman affirmed in press statements a decrease of cases in many localities of the State due to efforts of Federal State Health Ministries and partners. She appreciated support provided by the Governor of White Nile State to health teams working for combating the disease.White Nile----------However, these official statements are widely contradicted by reports reaching Radio Dabanga from the areas affected by the disease, which repeated tests according to WHO standards show to be cholera. There have been calls to declare a State of Emergency. The Governor of the White Nile, Abdelhameed Kasha, says 53 people have died in the state. In a statement to the Council of States in Khartoum on [Tue 23 May 2017], Kasha said 2755 people and 129 villages have been infected in the 'watery diarrhea' epidemic.The Sudanese Doctors' Central Committee announced the death of 40 people and infection of more than 1800 people with 'acute watery diarrhea' in the White Nile in the recent weeks. In a statement on [Wed 24 May 2017], the committee confirmed the spread of the epidemic to the outskirts of Khartoum and El Gezira states amid deterioration in the health conditions, government secrecy in dealing with the disease and neglecting the known health procedures. The Committee announced spread of the disease in Asalaya, El Duweim, Kosti, Rabak, El Gitena, El Gezira Aba, El Jabelein and Tendelti in White Nile stateThe Committee called on the State and Federal Ministry of Health to officially acknowledge the existence of a health disaster in the White Nile State and take health isolation measures. On [Tue 23 May 2017], the Governor of the White Nile said that he cannot announce a State of Emergency because that is not his mandate which must be done by the WHO.Governor Kasha said also that currently, White Nile state hosts 122 000 South Sudanese refugees in 8 camps and 50 000 others in various areas in the state.Kosti-----Journalists reported to Radio Dabanga that the medical isolation centre at Kosti Ophthalmology Hospital received 26 new cholera cases yesterday, [Wed 24 May 2017]. Tahir Ishag El Doma told Radio Dabanga from Kosti that the medical isolation centre of Block 54 in the town received 56 new cases on [Wed 24 May 2017].He explained that the high rate of infection has prompted the authorities to open a new medical isolation centre at the Abushareef district in the town where the centre received 18 new infection cases on [Wed 24 May 2017]. He explained that the government began to deal with the disease by providing intravenous solutions and mobilizing the medical staff.El Gezira Aba-------------The head of civil society organizations, Abdelrahman El Siddig, reported the death of 5 people of cholera in villages in El Gezira Aba on [Tue 23 and Wed 24 May 2017]. He told Radio Dabanga that on [Wed 24 May 2017], the number of hospitalized rose to 40. There is a shortage of medical staff and Asalaya hospital is overcrowded with patients. He said police have been deployed to the areas where pumps are drawing water from the Nile to prevent people from using it. El Siddig called on the authorities to close the factories that dispose of their waste in the Nile.El Obeid--------El Obeid hospital in North Kordofan has received 55 cases of acute watery diarrhea during the week. Dr Amer Adam, the deputy family medicine specialist and head of the hospital's doctors committee told Radio Dabanga that he attributed the outbreak of the disease to the contamination of drinking water and vegetables. Dr Adam called for banning the vegetables coming from White Nile state. He pointed out to the transmission of infection to the city from the White Nile state. He called on the authorities to chlorinate drinking water, provide intravenous solutions, prepare the newly opened isolation centre and raise awareness of people of the dangers of the spread of the disease.Sennar------Yesterday, [Wed 24 May 2017], workers in the health sector told Radio Dabanga that cholera is increasing in the areas of Mazmum and Abuareef in Sennar state. A worker in the health sector said that Mazmum area recorded 2 new cases of the disease at a time Abuareef health centre was overcrowded with patients yesterday, [Wed 24 May 2017]. He confirmed that the total number of deaths from cholera at Abuareef area has amounted to 6 cases since the beginning of May 2017.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Cholera - South Sudan (Tonj State)Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: Gurtong.net [edited]<http://www.gurtong.net/ECM/Editorial/tabid/124/ID/20493/Default.aspx>The Minister of Health in Tonj State, Lual Adhal has said cholera has killed more than 20 people in the last 2 weeks in Tonj State while detected cases are on daily basis increasing with admissions of 135 more at different localities.""A total of 4 emergency serving centers have now been opened in Palieng, Makuac, Mabara and Paweng to deal with the reporting cases and number of admitted patients"", said Adhal. ""We in the State and the national government are in coordination with the Red Cross and UNICEF in providing medical support to the health centres,"" he said.Adhal said last week, in Makuach County, Rialjok Akuecbeny 6 people in a cattle camp died from cholera, while 6 others with signs and symptoms of cholera were admitted at Marial-Lou hospital. He said that 62 people have been affected so far in Makuac Payam and 32 others in Mabara village while 16 in Paweng bringing the total to 135 in the State.[Byline: James Deng Dimo]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Cholera - KenyaDate: Wed 24 May 2017, 3:00 pmSource: The Star [edited]<http://www.the-star.co.ke/news/2017/05/24/cholera-outbreak-kills-four-146-cases-reported-in-kenya_c1567529>A total of 4 people have died from cholera since the outbreak earlier in May 2017, the Health ministry has reported. Medical services director Jackson Kioko said the 4 were among a total of 146 infected people. This was figure as at [Sun 21 May 2017]. Kioko said the 1st 2 cases were reported in Mathare, Nairobi where a total of 21 cases and 1 death have been recorded. There are 88 cases in Garissa, 15 cases and 2 deaths in Vihiga, 2 cases in Mombasa, a case in Kiambu and 11 cases and a death in Murang'a. ""Some of the cases reported in Nairobi, Mombasa and Vihiga are associated with a wedding in Karen over a week ago,"" Kioko said in a statement on [Wed 24 May 2017].The director said the government is working with counties and partners to end infections. Health workers were asked to keenly monitor suspected cases, follow cholera management guidelines and set up treatment centers. The ministry has also heightened surveillance for acute watery diarrhea by conducting active case searches and contact tracing.""We are also carrying out awareness on prevention and control [through measures such as] treating or boiling of water, use of latrines for safe disposal of fecal matter and early treatment of any signs of diarrhea,"" Kioko said.Other various measures include:- Reactivating the Multi-Sectoral Outbreak Management Technical Working Group and Rapid Response Teams, both at the national level and in affected counties.- Urging the public to take the initiative of drinking plenty of water with oral rehydration salts when they experience diarrhea.- Provision of water treatment chemicals, laboratory supplies and information on the disease.- Strengthening law enforcement; county environmental health officers have been asked to close or issue closure notices to hotels or eating premises that do not meet basic hygiene standards.- Strengthening the diagnostic capacity at the national and sub-national level, including county referral hospitals.[Byline: Nancy Agutu]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] Cholera - Ethiopia, SomaliaDate: Thu 25 May 2017Source: Outbreak News Today<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/cholera-horn-africa-67538/>While the cholera epidemic rages in Yemen with more than 32 000 cases reported since the beginning of the month [May 2017], across the Gulf of Aden, the 2 largest countries on the Horn of Africa are also battling increases in the gastrointestinal bacterial infection.In Somalia during the 1st 4 months of the year, 36 066 suspected cholera cases, including 697 deaths (CFR: 1.9 percent). The areas most heavily affected include Bay, Bakol and Lower Shabelle, Middle Juba and Gedo, all in the south. This compares to 15 619 suspected cholera cases including 531 deaths in all of 2016.In neighboring Ethiopia since the beginning of the year [2017], a total of 33 145 acute watery diarrhea (AWD) cases and 776 deaths (CFR 2.3 percent) have been reported in the country from 6 regions of Somali, Oromia, Amhara, Afar, SNNP and Tigray. A total of 91 percent of these cases and 99 percent of the deaths were reported in Somali Region. Fortunately, the WHO says the outbreak situation in Somali region has greatly improved following the upgrading of the event and subsequent scaling up of response interventions. Access to safe water has increased to large populations including provisions of other essential health care services.Because of the ongoing humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa- Gulf of Aden region, resulting in disruptions in water supplies and sanitation, and in the displacement of populations to overcrowded camps, the number of cholera cases detected each week may remain high or even increase, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) states.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness.As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press) oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea:""As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al. (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs. 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al. (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 percent to 3.6 percent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as ""potentially the most important medical advance"" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose- or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5).""The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref. 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.""References----------1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA and Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405.2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF and Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2.3. Gore SM, Fontaine O and Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhoea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91.4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK and Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205.5. Atia AN and Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329.6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhoea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/125>.]
