NBC News [edited]<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/girl-pulled-water-sea-lion-treated-seal-finger-infection-n764391>The family of the Canadian girl, who was dragged into the water by a sea lion over the weekend and is being treated for a related infection, is speaking out for the first time. The dramatic video of the sea lion grabbing the girl's dress and pulling her into the sea as she sat on a Richmond, British Columbia, pier on [Sat 20 May 2017] quickly went viral. An older man who appeared to be a relative jumped into the water and quickly rescued her. The girl's father credits the older relative's quick-thinking with saving her life. ""If he had 1- or 2-second doubt about that, my girl could have been gone by then. That reaction, makes him a hero,"" the girl's father said in an interview with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.Days later, the Vancouver Aquarium urged the girl's family to get her help because she was possibly in danger of a hazardous infection known as ""seal finger"". ""The family saw media reports in which our marine mammal trainer recommended they call us, and they did get in touch."" Vancouver Aquarium spokeswoman Deana Lancaster told NBC News. ""She did get a superficial wound and she's going to get the right treatment.""While some have blamed the ordeal on the girl's parents, and claims have been made that they were feeding the sea lion, the family denies the accusations. ""There was somebody beside them that was trying to feed them. Also, they weren't trying to take pictures or anything,"" the father said.A bite from a seal or a sea lion is quite different from that of a terrestrial animal because it carries a host of bacteria uncommon to land mammals, experts say. ""Seal finger"" can be caused by bacterium called _Mycoplasma phocacerebrale_, which must be treated promptly with tetracycline antimicrobials, Canadian researchers reported in 2009.Seal finger causes the affected area to swell up and look like it is practically inflated. It tends to affect the hands because that is where seal trainers, sealers, vets and biologists are wont to be nipped by the animal -- although it can also come from cuts on the hand while working with seal meat. ""If any member of our animal care team receives a bite from a sea or sea lion, they take a letter from our vet with them to the hospital, which explains that the infection is resistant to some antibiotics,"" Lancaster said.While it is more easily treated now, sealers historically lost their fingers or even their hands sometimes because of the disease. As the young girl receives treatment for the bite wound, her father said he is happy she is safe and has learned a lesson. ""Only thing I care is God, she is safe. I could have gone organizing a funeral by now rather than doing interview,"" he said.[Byline: Phil McCausland]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The following is extracted from ""White CP and Jewer DD: Seal finger: A case report and review of the literature. Can J Plast Surg. 2009;17: 133-135"" showing the abstract and discussion (citations available at original source <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2827281/>): Abstract--------A recent case of seal finger which was misdiagnosed and hence mistreated at the patient's 1st presentation is described. The patient was eventually referred to a hand specialist and after the correct treatment with tetracycline, responded well without any long-term sequelae. Seal finger is an occupational injury that occurs to those who work directly or indirectly with seals. The disease entity has been described in both Scandinavian and Canadian literature. The causative microorganism was unknown until 1991, when _Mycoplasma phocacerebrale_ was isolated from both the finger of a patient with seal finger and from the mouth of a seal that bit the patient. Although rare, the disease is not uncommon in marine workers, biologists and veterinarians. Prompt identification based on patient history and treatment with oral tetracycline is pendant to a favourable patient outcomeDiscussion----------Seal finger was 1st described by Bidenknap in 1907 (2). In the 1st half of the 20th century it was common in Norway and Newfoundland sealing fleets, where an estimated 10 percent and 2.5 percent of the sealers were affected, respectively (3). It most commonly occurred in people who either hunted or handled seal meat (4). Later in the 20th century many of those affected with seal finger were researchers and veterinarians (5). Traditionally, seal finger most commonly affected the middle and index finger because of the practice of placing these 2 digits through the eye slits of seal pelts to drag them along the ice.Even from the earliest records, the disease entity was described as a painful, swollen, stiff, erythematous finger with possible axillary lymphadenopathy. Laboratory investigations show increased white blood cell count with neutrophilia (4,6,7). X-rays are usually normal in the acute stage (7) but eventually may show joint destruction (5). The entrance of infection is through epithelial deficiency, or weakness of skin barrier (4,8). The incubation period is reported to be from 7 to 15 days (9).Naming schemes for the disease include in English, seal finger or sealer's finger, and in Norwegian, 'spekkfinger' or 'speak finger', which means 'blubber finger'. In the Baltic seas, the term 'salrota', which means 'seal rot', is used. In the Gulf of Finland, other synonyms include 'salen I fingret', which means 'the seal in the finger', or from other translations 'seal blood in the finger', 'blubber in the finger' and 'blubber poisoning' (8).Seal hunters and seal meat handlers are most likely to get the infection on the index or middle finger of the nondominant hand because this hand tends to get accidentally cut by the knife being used in the dominant hand (9,10). Those actually bitten by a seal tend to have the thumb of the dominant hand affected (5,11). These patients tend to be researchers and wildlife workers.The differential diagnosis includes erysipeloid, atypical mycobacteriosis (12) and _Vibrio vulnificus_ infection (13). In erysipeloid, the erythema is much more intense and the causative organism _Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae_ can be cultured quite easily (5). Infection with atypical mycobacteria also causes less pain than seal finger but is known to be very difficult to culture with normal methods (4).Numerous case reports tell of adverse outcomes from the infection after incorrect treatment. These usually include the immediate consequences of pain, discomfort, decreased function and, in the long term, may include stiffness and permanent loss of finger joint range of motion (5). Other long-term consequences include ankylosis of interphalangeal joints, severe pain on movements or marked sensitiveness to cold. Surgical treatment for these problems included arthrodesis or amputation (4). It was not uncommon that a patient at sea on a fishing voyage would demand amputation of a finger to avoid losing valuable working time and wages (9).Histological pathology reveals perivascular infiltration with lymphoctes and plasma cells in subcutaneous adipose tissue, and a few granulocytes without pus or necrosis. Fibrosis eventually takes place (4). Grossly joint pathology can be seen. Involved joints show severe inflammatory reaction with chronic granulation tissue and scarring with destruction of the articular cartilage (5).Seals (_Pinnipedia_ suborder) are classified as either eared, earless or walruses. The Canadian seal hunt includes harp seals (_Pagophilus groenlandicus_), the hooded seal (_Cystophora cristata_), the harbor seal (_Phoca vitulina_) and the grey seal (_Halichoerus grypus_), all which are hunted for their fur pelts (14). Harbor seals are earless and the most common associated with seal finger. Other types of sea mammals have been implicated in seal finger including elephant seals (_Mirounga leonine_) (5,13) and sea lions (7).There are numerous case reports of patients being unsuccessfully treated with initial 1st line antimicrobials (15). The consequences of incorrect choice antibiotics is usually an extended course of treatment (6), loss of recovery time and numerous consultations (7), unnecessary invasive procedures (17) and permanent damage to the joint (11,12). One of the main reasons for incorrect treatment is possibly ""lack of awareness by primary physicians of seal finger as a clinical entity"" (5).The link between seals and _Mycoplasma_ was not proven until 1991. _Mycoplasma_ species were first isolated from the trachea, bronchus, lung and heart in diseased harbor seals (_Phoca vitulina_) during an epizootic outbreak of seal pneumonia along the New England sea board in 1979 and 1980. The _Mycoplasma_ strain was classified as the new species _Mycoplasma phocidae_ (19,20). Later, in 1988 and 1989 in the Baltic Sea and North Sea during another mass mortality of seals, 2 new species - _M phocacerebrale_ and _M phocarhinis_ - were identified (21).The discovery of _Mycoplasma_ species in epidemics of seal disease prompted researchers to explore the possibility of _Mycoplasmas_ as a cause of seal finger. They isolated _M phocacerebrale_ from the finger of an aquarium trainer who was bitten by a seal and also from the biting seal (1,18,22). The isolates from the seal's mouth and the patient's finger were the same. The isolates were also identical to the Baltic Sea _Mycoplasma_ strain _M phocacerebrale_ but not the same as the New England strain _M phocidae_ (18,23). This observation by Madoff et al (21) in 1991 was the 1st documented case of _Mycoplasma_ as the causative agent of sealer's finger. _Mycoplasma_ species are known to cause both arthritis and be passed from one species to another (24).Past traditional treatments of sealer's finger included dressing the affected digit with camphor oil, wheat flour paste and alcohol, soap with washing soda, and hot water (3). Other things like vinegar, brine, hot ash lye, linseed, pitch oil, rye flour, fur resin, pork slices and bear gall were also used. Other treatments have included magic spells recited over the finger, and stroking the tip of the finger with a feather from the left wing of a grouse (8). Treatments used in Canada included heat, splinting and amputation (9). Other treatments such as heat soaks, drainage and injections of penicillin were also used (10). Prophylactic techniques included hand washing with brine, petroleum, simple sap and wearing gloves (8).Early reports noted the effectiveness of chlortetracycline (aureomycin) for the treatment of seal finger (8,10). Treatment regiments of 16 to 18 doses of aureomycin 250 mg every 6 h for 10 days were used (9). There are documented cases of the infection's resistance to antimicrobials including dicloxacillin, penicillin (5) and cephalexin (7,15). Patients with seal finger respond to tetracycline (5,7,15). Current recommended treatment for seal finger is tetracycline 1.5 g immediately and 0.5 g orally 4 times a day for 2 to 6 weeks (5,12) or 1 g twice daily intravenously (11,18). It was thought that because _Mycoplasmas_ lack a cell wall, the disease does not respond to beta-lactam antimicrobials (13). - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/10738>.]
