WIS TV 1:20 pm EDT [edited]<http://www.wistv.com/story/ 35517881/what-you-need-to-know-as-a-rabies-distemper-outbreak-spreads-to-kershaw-county>[Canine distemper] is a [viral disease] looking just like rabies, and it's just as lethal for your dog. It doesn't have a cure, and there's an outbreak of it in Kershaw County.""It's airborne,"" veterinarian Dr Wendy King said. ""It can go from one cage to the next and they don't even have to touch each other. So what happens is if any of these pets in quarantine are in the same area, they can spread the disease.""King, who works at Elgin's Spears Creek Veterinary Clinic, says the virus hasn't been prevalent in almost 20-30 years since the vaccine became readily available. Distemper presents first with a green discharge from the dog's nose, then a fever and lethargic behavior. Then, the virus invades the nervous system as the animal begins to exhibit neurological signs like staggering, trembling, and seizures.These signs look just like rabies. The difference between rabies and distemper is that distemper cannot be contracted by humans, while humans can get rabies.""If the dog gets distemper, 80 to 90 percent of them are fatal cases,"" King said. ""There is no treatment for it, and if they survive it, they have permanent neurological damage. The problem is, there's always going to be a little bit in the wild. Because distemper is in canines -- or 'canids' it can be foxes, coyotes, and even raccoons can get it. So it's always going to be out there.""According to DHEC [Department of Health and Environmental Control], every year about 124 animals test positive for rabies in South Carolina. It's not possible to tell whether a dog has contracted rabies or distemper until after the dog has died and tests are done.The distemper outbreak has been seen in Lancaster County as well. The Lancaster County Animal Shelter closed temporarily in early May [2017] as a result of a distemper outbreak at the shelter.Puppies get a set of 4 distemper vaccines starting at 6 weeks old. They get their next distemper vaccines at 9, 12, and 15 weeks. The rabies vaccine begins at 15 weeks.King said preventing distemper in your pets is simple: make sure your dogs get their annual vaccinations.""I want people to be aware that these are out there, and both of these diseases are preventable,"" King said.[Byline: Samantha Bleiweis]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The state of South Carolina can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/18875>. A county map can be seen at <http://geology.com/county-map/south-carolina-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJThis article indicates this virus looks like rabies. This is true especially in wildlife, but even then, depending upon the species, there are likely subtle clues of distemper vs rabies. Canine distemper impacts wildlife populations and contact between wild animals and domestic dogs can facilitate the spread of the virus. Canine distemper outbreaks in local raccoon populations can signal increased risk for pet dogs in the area.Initially, infected dogs will develop watery to pus-like discharge from their eyes. They then develop fever, nasal discharge, coughing, lethargy, reduced appetite, and vomiting. As the virus attacks the nervous system, infected dogs develop circling behavior, head tilt, muscle twitches, convulsions with jaw chewing movements and salivation (""chewing gum fits""), seizures, and partial or complete paralysis. The virus may also cause the footpads to thicken and harden, leading to its nickname ""hard pad disease.""Animals affected with this disease usually die or have severe neurological difficulties if they survive. The ""chewing gum fits"" is one clinical sign veterinarians recognize to attempt to distinguish this from rabies.There are clinical tests to aid in the diagnosis, in addition to the clinical observation. Of course, when the animal is deceased, or euthanized, the brain can be sent for rabies testing.While puppies may receive a series of 4 shots, it is equally important to get an annual booster for your adult pets.If this virus is circulating in your area, avoiding dog parks and other canine social events should reduce the risk of contacting a pet incubating the virus.The warning of this article is to be sure your pet is current on rabies and distemper vaccines. - Mod.TG]
