Courier mail [edited]<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/research-finds-doctors-miss-dengue-fever-warning-signs-and-prescribe-wrong-drugs/news-story/d2580e72fa3641573da299d472b4777d>Doctors are failing to pick up warning signs for a severe form of dengue fever and in 1 in 5 cases are prescribing medicine that would make the patient's condition worse, new research has found. The Australian study of 208 patients hospitalised between January 2012 and May 2015 found doctors were struggling to recognise symptoms associated with severe dengue, which in extreme cases could be deadly. In more than 20 percent of cases patients were prescribed the common painkiller ibuprofen, exposing them to unnecessary risk of haemorrhage. Cairns couple Mena and Ron Crew contracted dengue fever simultaneously and warn of the dangers of the mosquito-borne disease during the wet season in the far north.Queensland Health data available online shows there have been 129 cases of dengue diagnosed in the state so far this year [2017] and 447 cases confirmed last year [2016]. Local outbreaks were identified in Cairns, Innisfail, Townsville, Masig (Yorke) Island, and Boigu Island during the 1st 3 months of the year [2017], but the number of cases reported was dwarfed by those brought back from overseas.Monash Health infectious diseases physician Alex Tai said far north Queensland doctors were generally more familiar with dengue that those in the rest of the country. The study, published in the Medical Journal of Australia today [9 Apr 2017], found Australian travellers most often acquired dengue in Indonesia and Thailand.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] VaccinePhilippinesDate: 16 Apr 2017Source: Business Mirror [edited]<http://www.businessmirror.com.ph/finally-a-vaccine-for-dengue/>Dengue is a serious public-health concern in the Philippines. It can affect anyone, no matter what the age or social status. It is an illness caused by a mosquito bite. Dengue is normally not fatal, but it could be. In the last 5 decades, dengue has spread from a handful of countries to over 128. The incidence has increased 30-fold in this period.This has been blamed on factors such as unprecedented urbanization and globalization, which has resulted in large mosquito populations living in places with big human populations. This has led to an increased transmission and geographic spread of the virus. Other factors, such as inadequate housing, water, sewage and waste-management systems, have contributed to an increase in the populations of the _Aedes aegypti_ mosquito, which is responsible for dengue.According to the World Health Organization (WHO), over 3.2 million cases were reported in 2015 across the Americas, Southeast Asia and Western Pacific. In 2015 the Philippines reported over 169 000. This represented a 59.5 percent increase from the previous year [2014]. Last year [2016] over 200 000 cases were reported in the country. The Philippines was 7th in the world and 4th overall in Asia Pacific for incidence of dengue from 2004 to 2010.Dengue is scary. There are 4 strains of the virus. My cousin has been infected with 3 of those strains. A doctor has warned that a 4 infection could be fatal.Now for some good news: Health and beauty chain Watsons has announced the availability of dengue vaccination (Dengvaxia) in select stores nationwide. The dengue vaccination was launched in the country by the Department of Health (DOH), together with the Department of Education (DepEd). It was later made available in medical clinics last year [2016]. Watsons is the 1st retailer to offer it in the Philippine market. ""As part of our commitment to improving the lives and health of Filipinos by making health care more accessible to them, we decided to offer dengue vaccination in our select stores nationwide. Dengue is a recurring epidemic in the country, and that's why we recognize the importance of protecting Filipinos against this deadly disease through the vaccination,"" said Danilo Chiong, Watsons Trading Health director.Dengvaxia was created by Sanofi Pasteur, a leading multinational pharmaceutical company and an expert in the development of vaccinations. It took more than 20 years to develop and has been thoroughly tested based on WHO guidelines. Studies of the vaccine included more than 41 000 people and were carried out in 15 countries, including the Philippines. The results were fully reviewed by a committee of independent experts, and the vaccine has also been recommended by the WHO.In the Philippines the DOH, together with the DepEd, launched the much-awaited administration of the dengue vaccine via a school-based immunization approach. The dengue vaccine has also gotten the endorsement of the Philippine Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, and the Philippine College of Physicians.According to a study by the University of the Philippines National Institute of Health, the vaccine is expected to reduce dengue cases in the country by over 24 percent in a span of 5 years. The dengue vaccination, to be taken in 3 doses at 0-6-12 months interval, can protect the individual from all 4 strains of the dengue virus. This can be administered to people age 9 to 45. It will cost P 4000 [USD 80] per dose, or P 12 000 [USD 240] for all 3 doses.The first scheduled dengue vaccination will be on 30 Apr 2018 (1st dose), 29 Oct 2018 (2nd dose) and 29 Apr 2018 (3rd dose); while the 2nd scheduled dengue vacation will be on 14 May 2018 (1st dose), 12 Nov 2018 (2nd dose), 13 May 2018 (3rd dose). This will be available in more than 100 stores nationwide.[Byline: Dinna Chan Vasquez]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>MalaysiaDate: 4 May 2017Source: The Star [edited]<http://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2017/05/04/dengue-vaccine-not-for-all-ages-only-those-aged-between-nine-and-45-will-be-administered-the-medicin/>Malaysians should not be too worried about getting severe dengue symptoms from the use of the dengue vaccine because it is not allowed for use by a susceptible age group here, the Malaysian Paediatric Association (MPA) said. Committee member Datuk Dr Zulkifli Ismail said the vaccine, the 1st introduced in the world by Sanofi Pasteur, was only allowed for individuals aged 9 to 45 and not in younger children, who could develop such symptoms after vaccination.He said the phenomenon described by dengue expert Dr Scott Halstead many years ago in patients who had secondary dengue infection was not seen in those who had received the vaccine. Dr Halstead, who 1st identified the antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) phenomenon, said infection with 1 of the 4 strains of the virus allows a 2nd dengue infection to cause severe illness, including dengue haemorrhagic fever. His ADE theory holds that the longer the interval between infection with different dengue strains, the more severe the disease.ADE was observed following a study on mice and later in Cuba when a less serious outbreak of the type 1 dengue virus was followed by a more severe wave of type 2 dengue cases 1 to 2 decades later. A similar phenomenon was seen in babies born to mothers infected with the dengue virus. It significantly increases the likelihood of the children contracting a severe case of the disease.Dr Zulkifli, who is also the Asia Pacific Paediatric Association secretary-general, was commenting on a recent statement by Health director-general Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah that one of the possible adverse effects of dengue vaccination was that people could develop severe dengue or get dengue shock syndrome.The National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency had announced on its website recently that the vaccine was approved for a post-registration (phase 4) study in Malaysia by the Drug Control Authority for two years and may be used in those aged 9 to 45.Using Sanofi Pasteur's data from phase 3 clinical trials of the vaccine, Dr Halstead and fellow researcher Dr Philip K. Russell showed that - during year 3 of the trial - the dengue hospitalisation rate was higher among children aged 5 or younger who received the vaccine than in the control groups that did not. The trials involved more than 35 000 children in 10 dengue-endemic countries. The data showed that 54.2 percent of the children were seronegative, which means their blood tested negative for the virus, upon enrolment in the trials.Dr Halstead and Dr Russell published their findings in the journal Vaccine in February last year [2016]. Dr Russell had said the company did not directly address the ADE phenomenon nor provided a good explanation for the high risk of hospitalisation among seronegative children. While the company maintained that it only vaccinated children over age 9, Dr Russell said age was ""only a surrogate here for being dengue naive (not exposed to dengue previously). They need to directly address ADE in phase 4 studies.""Dr Zulkifli argued that there may be many other reasons for the presumably dengue-naive children getting severe dengue as children are not, and should never be, regarded as ""little adults"" physiologically. He said the only way to have proper results on the vaccine's effectiveness on the ground is for it to be used in line with what was approved by the regulatory authorities, and with proper monitoring.[Byline: Loh Foon Fong]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] ResearchEncephalitis in DengueDate: 4 May 2017Source: PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases[edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005369>Our patient with DENV-4 infection developed new acute neurological symptoms of confusion and expressive aphasia at day 6 of her acute dengue illness. CSF showed lymphocytic pleocytosis with a positive CSF dengue IgM and IgG. Testing for other pathogens in CSF was negative. She had not travelled to areas endemic for other flaviviruses. Although DENV-4 has been reported to potentially cause encephalitis, those cases were fatal, with multiorgan involvement and dengue haemorrhagic fever [6,7] By contrast, our patient had no other features of severe dengue, such as severe plasma leakage, bleeding, or other organ impairment. This is the first known case of DENV-4 encephalitis with complete recovery.Citation: Ng DHL, Sadarangani SP (2017) ""Locked in a cage""--A case of dengue virus 4 encephalitis. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 11(5): e0005369. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0005369>--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>Optimum Temperature for MosquitoesDate: 4 May 2017Source: CCTV News, a Xinhua report [edited]<http://english.cctv.com/2017/05/05/ARTIeLzDanxIExbQUIeGIVOQ170505.shtml>A group of researchers at Stanford University have found that 29 deg C [84 deg F], is the best temperature for mosquito to spread disease. According to a report of PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, when temperatures were cooler or warmer, the traits for mosquito to spread diseases, such as dengue, chikungunya and Zika, were lower. Temperature controls several factors that underlie the time it takes for a virus to be transmittable to humans, including how long it takes for a mosquito to ingest a virus during one feeding and then be ready to inject it in a later feeding; the length of the mosquito's life cycle; and how often mosquitoes bite.""All these traits rely on temperature, but they tend to be nonlinear,"" study lead author Erin Mordecai, an assistant professor of biology, was quoted as saying in a news release. ""They increase to a point and then drop off.""Before this study, there was a wide range of temperature predictions from other researchers, Mordecai said. And knowing the optimal temperature for disease transmission is critical for predicting future disease rates. ""Dengue epidemics have been on the rise in the past couple decades so there's been a growing effort trying to understand why we're seeing more dengue, and what the relationship is between dengue transmission and climate,"" she explained.The information can help predict how and where disease might spread with climate change, especially in countries that have lower socioeconomic levels, according to Mordecai, as ""concentrated urban poverty is really where you see a lot of vector-borne disease transmission."" With the new model, researchers are expected to better predict when and where transmission of the next Zika might happen, and allow enough time to prepare for the event.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>Dengue cases in BaliDate: 22 May 2017Source: PLOS Neglected trop. Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005483>AbstractA high number of dengue cases are reported annually in Bali. Despite the endemicity, limited data on dengue is available for Bali localities. Molecular surveillance study was conducted to explore the clinical and virological characteristics of dengue patients in urban Denpasar and rural Gianyar areas in Bali during the peak season in 2015. A total of 203 adult dengue-suspected patients were recruited in a prospective cross-sectional study. Demographic and clinical information were obtained, and dengue screening was performed using NS1 and IgM/IgG ELISAs. Viral RNA was subsequently extracted from patients' sera for serotyping using conventional RT-PCR and Simplexa Dengue real-time RT-PCR, followed by genotyping with sequencing method. We confirmed 161 patients as having dengue by NS1 and RT-PCR. Among 154 samples successfully serotyped, the DENV-3 was predominant, followed by DENV-1, DENV-2, and DENV-4. Serotype predominance was different between Denpasar and Gianyar. Genotyping results classify DENV-1 isolates into Genotype I and DENV-2 as Cosmopolitan Genotype. The classification grouped isolates into Genotype I and II for DENV-3 and DENV-4, respectively. Clinical parameters showed no relationship between infecting serotypes and severity. We observed the genetic diversity of circulating DENV isolates and their relatedness with historical data and importation to other countries. Our data highlights the role of this tourist destination as a potential source of dengue transmission in the region.Citation: Megawati D, Masyeni S, Yohan B, et al. Dengue in Bali: Clinical characteristics and genetic diversity of circulating dengue viruses. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017;11(5):e0005483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005483--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/5626>.]
