Yaqein News Agency [in Arabic, trans. Mod.NS, edited]<http://yaqein.net/politics/38219>Viral hepatitis has spread in Al-Saqlawiyah city (8 km or 5 miles north west of Fallujah) in Al-Anbar governorate, amid shortages of medicines and lack of health care services.The correspondent of Yaqein News Agency said that ""more than 15 cases of viral hepatitis have been recorded in Al-Saqlawiyah, Al-Anbar governorate. He indicated that the health centers lack medical supplies and vaccines to prevent the disease. The correspondent added that ""the viral hepatitis cases have been diagnosed in the areas of the center of Al-Saqlawiyah, Bakkash, and Zaghart.""He added that ""viral hepatitis is contagious, and there is no movement from the local government in Al-Saqlawiyah towards the concerned authorities in order to control the situation before the occurrence of a disaster.""--communicated by:ProMED-MENA<promed-mena@promedmail.org>[Both hepatitis A and E viruses are waterborne and can occur in outbreaks. In areas of poor public health infrastructure where waterborne infections are common if outbreaks of viral hepatitis occur in adults, it is likely that the culprit is the hepatitis E virus. This is the case since, in many countries; the seroprevalence rate of hepatitis A is close to 100 per cent by the age of 10.The following is part of a UN Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office (<http://www.emro.who.int/irq/programmes/hepatitis.html>) report on viral hepatitis in Iraq:""In Iraq, the number of hepatitis A cases has increased from 1802 in 2009 to 4473 in 2014 among nationals. The country is a low endemicity country for hepatitis B and C. The usual mode of transmission is blood transfusions or repeated exposure to blood and its derivatives (post-transfusion non-A non-B hepatitis).""For hepatitis B, 3674 cases were reported; hepatitis C 929 cases were reported and 199 cases were reported for hepatitis E. This was due to expansion of diagnosis in district labs. In the past, diagnosis was in public health laboratory in governorates. However, since 2013 diagnosis is conducted in district laboratories. Each district has an ELISA machine for hepatitis diagnostics. The major challenge for the program is availability of funds, security situation in the country, overcrowding in the areas of migrants and refugees. The program also suffers from lack of training and capacity-building and lack of availability of diagnostic kits.""The transmission of hepatitis type A and E is facilitated by poor infrastructure, poor quality of potable water, unsafe food and poor hygiene. A majority of health workers do not follow medical guidelines in dealing with blood and its derivatives, which has led to the spread of hepatitis B and C in communities. The priorities of the Ministry of Health are to establish an efficient hepatitis surveillance system, build the capacity of health personnel to manage patients, and provide medicines and diagnostic services at governorate level.""Al Anbar Governorate, or Anbar Province, is the largest governorate in Iraq by area. Encompassing much of the country's western territory, it shares borders with Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. The provincial capital is Ramadi; other important cities include Fallujah and Haditha. The name of the governorate in Persian language means ""warehouse"" or ""silo"", from the verb, anb̢shtan (to store, to warehouse). This was the last stop/warehouses on the old Silk Road toward Syria. The governorate can be found on a map at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al_Anbar_Governorate>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/60823>.]
