Bangor Daily News (BDN) Maine [edited]<http://bangordailynews.com/2017/05/31/health/tick-borne-powassan-virus-sickens-two-residents-in-midcoast-maine/>Two residents of midcoast Maine are recovering from the Powassan virus, a rare but life-threatening illness spread by a tick bite.The Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention said in a news release [Wed 31 May 2017], that it was notified of the 2 cases last week. The 2 adults became ill in late April [2017] and were hospitalized with encephalitis, or inflammation of the brain, caused by the virus. Both have since been discharged, the CDC said. The cases were confirmed through testing at the US CDC's division in Fort Collins, Colorado. Maine CDC did not release details about the individuals, including where in midcoast Maine they were infected or whether their cases were related.The 2 infections bring Maine's case count for Powassan to 9 since 2000. The virus claimed the life of a Rockland-area artist in late 2013.Powassan is only one of several diseases caused by ticks that are on the rise in Maine. Lyme disease, the most prevalent, rose to a record 1464 cases last year [2016]. Anaplasmosis, a bacterial infection that can lead to similar long-term effects as Lyme without a proper diagnosis, climbed dramatically as well.Powassan is spread by the bite of an infected deer or woodchuck tick and can cause fever, headache, vomiting, weakness, confusion and seizures. Brain swelling is a potentially devastating complication that kills 10 per cent of those who develop it, according to the CDC. About half of those who survive the infection suffer permanent neurological symptoms such as memory problems, facial tics and blurred vision. There is no vaccine or treatment other than keeping patients comfortable and hydrated during hospitalization. Many patients, on the other hand, experience no symptoms at all, according to the CDC. Symptoms can begin anytime from 1 week to 1 month after a tick bite.What makes Powassan particularly troubling -- in addition to the potentially debilitating symptoms -- is the speed of its transmission. While a tick must be attached for 36 to 48 hours to transmit Lyme disease, according to health officials, Powassan has been shown to spread from tick to human in under an hour.Maine researchers recently surveyed the state's ticks for Powassan, and found the virus largely in the southern part of the state, but also in Augusta and on Swan's Island in Hancock County. No Powassan was found east of Mount Desert Island or in northern Maine, though tickborne infections are known to move and spread.Powassan was 1st recognized in the town of Powassan, Ontario, in 1958. The illness is uncommon, with approximately 75 cases reported nationally over the last 10 years, primarily in the north east and Great Lakes regions, according to the CDC. But the number of cases has increased in recent years.""Powassan, although rare, can be serious so it is important to be aware of your surroundings and take steps to avoid being bitten by ticks. Ticks are found in wooded and bushy areas so use caution if you go into these areas,"" state epidemiologist Dr Siiri Bennett said in the Maine CDC release.The CDC recommends the following tips to reduce the risk of disease spread by ticks:- choose light-colored clothing so it's easier to spot ticks; wear long sleeves and tuck your pants into your socks;- use an EPA-approved insect repellent;- check your skin and clothing for ticks and remove them promptly. Don't miss warm, moist areas such as the ears, armpits and neck, and have someone else check your back;- wash possible tick bites with soap and water and apply an antiseptic;- keep your lawn mowed and tidy to remove tick habitat;- if you spot an embedded tick, use a tick spoon or tweezers to grasp its mouth and pull it out with steady pressure. Don't use petroleum jelly, hot matches or nail polish remover, which can increase the risk of infection.[byline: Jackie Farwell]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The rapid transmission of this virus by its vector is discussed in: Hermance ME, Thangamani S: Powassan Virus. An emerging arbovirus of public health concern in North America. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2017 May 12. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2017.2110. [Epub ahead of print] <http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/pdf/10.1089/vbz.2017.2110>:""The duration of _Ixodes scapularis_, the deer tick, attachment required for successful transmission of Powassan virus to a host was found to be as little as 15min by Ebel and Kramer (Ebel GD, Kramer LD. Short report: duration of tick attachment required for transmission of Powassan virus by deer ticks. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2004; 71: 268-271) in 2004. This •Â nding was particularly striking because unlike other tickborne pathogens (_Borrelia burgdorferi_, _Babesia microti_, and _Anaplasma phagocytophilum_), very little time between tick attachment and virus transmission is needed. The reactivation period required for some nonviral tickborne pathogens provides a grace period of approximately 24 hrs, where a minimal risk of transmission occurs if humans remove the attached tick within this timeline; however, there is no such grace period for Powassan virus due to its very short timeline of transmission. These differences underscore why the timeline of the virus' transmission must be carefully considered when analyzing the early immunomodulatory events that occur at the feeding site of the tick."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/222>.]
