Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/legionnaires-disease-cases-60-europe-linked-dubai-travel-61691/>Legionnaires' disease cases up to 60 in Europe: linked to Dubai travel---------------------------------------------------------------In recent months, there has been an increase in the number of cases of legionnaires' disease among European travelers returning from Dubai. As the source has not yet been identified, there could still be a risk for exposure to legionella for people visiting or living in Dubai.Between 1 Oct 2016 and 23 May 2017, 60 cases of legionnaires' disease with a history of travel to Dubai have been reported to the European Centres for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). The majority of cases stayed in commercial accommodation sites.The number of cases reported during February and April 2017 are still higher than in previous years. The most recent case became ill on 11 May 2017. These recent cases suggest there is still an ongoing exposure risk.The risk of legionnaires' disease to travelers to Dubai is considered to be low. However, the risk may be increased for the following groups:- those aged over 50;- those with underlying breathing problems;- those who have weakened immune systems; and- smokers.If you are travelling to Dubai, be aware of the symptoms of legionnaires' disease. If symptoms develop while in Dubai you should seek medical care. If symptoms develop within 2 weeks of returning home you should seek medical care and inform your healthcare provider of your travel history.Legionnaires' disease is a type of pneumonia caused by the bacterium _Legionella pneumophila_ and other _Legionella_ species. The illness usually starts with flu-like symptoms including fever, tiredness, headache, and muscle pains. This is followed by a dry cough and breathing difficulties which may progress to a severe pneumonia. The disease is spread through the air from a water source. People become infected when they breathe in aerosols (tiny droplets of water) which have been contaminated with the bacteria.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The last ProMED-mail post on these cases -- dated 30 Dec 2016 -- (Legionellosis - EU: EU travelers, ex United Arab Emirates (Dubai) susp 20161230.4733569) reported on 26 symptomatic cases in travelers from the European Union linked to Dubai.The following is a good review on the history of this infection, which came into the public view after an outbreak of pneumonia related to an American Legion convention at a hotel in Philadelphia during the summer of 1976.Winn WC Jr. Legionnaires disease: historical perspective. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1988; 1(1): 60-81; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC358030/>.Abstract--------In the summer of 1976, a mysterious epidemic of fatal respiratory disease in Philadelphia launched an intensive investigation that resulted in the definition of a new family of pathogenic bacteria, the _Legionellaceae_. In retrospect, members of the family had been isolated from clinical specimens as early as 1943. Unsolved epidemics of acute respiratory disease dating to the 1950s were subsequently attributed to the newly described pathogens. In the intervening years, the _Legionellaceae_ have been firmly established as important causes of sporadic and epidemic respiratory disease. The sources of the infecting bacteria are environmental, and geographic variation in the frequency of infection has been documented. Airborne dissemination of bacteria from cooling towers and evaporative condensers has been responsible for some epidemics, but potable water systems are perhaps more important sources. The mode of transmission from drinking water is unclear. The _Legionellaceae_ are Gram negative, facultative, intracellular pathogens. The resident alveolar macrophage, usually an effective antibacterial defense, is the primary site of growth. Cell-mediated immunity appears to be the most important immunological defense; the role of humoral immunity is less clear.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/132>.]
