Huffington Post [edited]<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/death-cap-mushroom-poisoning_us_5932249ce4b0c242ca244615>Death cap mushrooms foraged in Northern California have severely poisoned 14 people in the past few months, 3 so seriously that they needed liver transplants. One victim is a toddler who will have ""permanent neurological impairment,"" according to a medical report.The high number of poisonings has alarmed officials. The mushrooms, often mistaken for a benign variety, have flourished this year [2017] in heavy rains. Mushroom experts 1st noticed a particularly large bloom of death caps in November 2016.News of the string of poisonings that began in December 2016 came to light this week in a ""Morbidity and Mortality"" report by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]. Besides the toddler, the victims ranged from 19 to 93 years of age, according to the CDC statistics. The poisonings occurred in 5 counties, and hospital stays ranged from 6 to 36 days.The worst case involved an entire family in Salinas. A woman who was given the mushrooms by a forager cooked them for herself, her husband, her 18 month old daughter, her sister and a friend. They all became ill, and the toddler and the woman's sister needed liver transplants. ""It was like a bus accident happening right in front of the hospital,"" Dr Todd Mitchell told The Santa Cruz Sentinel as he described the life-and-death demands of treating mushroom poisoning.Mitchell, one of the authors of the CDC report, is conducting a clinical trial to determine the effectiveness of a treatment protocol._Amanita phalloides_ is one of the deadliest mushrooms on Earth and is responsible for 90 per cent of mushroom poisonings around the world. Once the mushroom's amatoxin is ingested, it begins to kill cells, eventually shutting down organs [There are actually 3 closely related toxins, amatoxins, phallotoxins and virotoxins, in the death cap mushroom. - Mod.TG]The mushrooms are most abundant during rainy fall and winter months, but they can survive throughout the year in coastal fog in California. The CDC report urges extreme caution when hunting for wild mushrooms, adding that ""inexperienced foragers should be strongly discouraged from eating any wild mushrooms."" The mushrooms are a serious threat in remote areas around the globe where medical help is too far for quick treatment.""These mushrooms continue to wipe out entire families each and every year in Nepal, South Africa, Russia, Ukraine, Viet Nam and India as well as China,"" Mitchell told the Sentinel. ""Amanita mushroom poisoning is an unrecognized worldwide public health crisis. Literally, hundreds die every single year.""[byline: Mary Papenfuss]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: 2 Jun 2017Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6621a1.htm?s_cid=mm6621a1_w#T1_down>_Amanita phalloides_, colloquially known as the ""death cap,"" belongs to the Phalloideae section of the Amanita family of mushrooms and is responsible for most deaths following ingestion of foraged mushrooms worldwide (1).On 28 Nov 2016, members of the Bay Area Mycological Society notified personnel at the California Poison Control System (CPCS) of an unusually large _A. phalloides_ bloom in the greater San Francisco Bay Area, coincident with the abundant rainfall and recent warm weather. Five days later, CPCS received notification of the 1st human _A. phalloides_ poisoning of the season. Over the following 2 weeks, CPCS was notified of an additional 13 cases of hepatotoxicity resulting from _A. phalloides_ ingestion. In the past few years before this outbreak, CPCS received reports of only a few mushroom poisoning cases per year. A summary of 14 reported cases is presented here. Data extracted from patient medical charts revealed a pattern of delayed gastrointestinal manifestations of intoxication leading to dehydration and hepatotoxicity. Three patients received liver transplants, and all but one recovered completely. The morbidity and potential lethality associated with _A. phalloides_ ingestion are serious public health concerns and warrant medical provider education and dissemination of information cautioning against consuming foraged wild mushrooms.Initial caseA man aged 37 years (patient A) picked 2 wild mushrooms in Santa Rosa, California. He cooked and ate one mushroom, and about 10 hours later developed nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. He was evaluated in a local emergency department (ED) for abdominal discomfort 20.5 hours after ingestion. A mycologist identified the uncooked mushroom sample provided by the patient as _A. phalloides_. Initial laboratory findings were notable for an elevated white blood cell count with lactate elevation and elevated creatinine suggesting dehydration (table). Liver function tests (LFTs) 6 hours later showed elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (92 IU/L; normal = 15-41) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (95 IU/L; normal = 17-63) levels. He was treated with aggressive intravenous (IV) fluid hydration, IV octreotide, and IV silibinin. Two days after ingestion, the patient's LFTs peaked at AST = 6,159 IU/L, ALT = 3,084 IU/L, total bilirubin = 2.9 mg/dL (normal = 0.2-1.2), and international normalized ratio (INR) (standardized prothrombin time) 3.2 units (normal = 0.8-1.2). Gastrointestinal symptoms and laboratory values gradually improved, and the patient was discharged home on day 6.DiscussionOver the course of 2 weeks in December 2016, CPCS investigated 14 suspected _A. phalloides_ ingestions in 5 northern California counties. Eleven patients recovered, although 3 required liver transplants because of irreversible fulminant hepatic failure. One of those patients, a child, developed cerebral edema and suffered permanent neurologic sequelae.Amatoxins, consisting of alpha, beta, and gamma amanitin, account for greater than 90 per cent of deaths related to mushroom poisoning worldwide (1). _A. phalloides_ contains the alpha variety of amanitin, a cyclic octapeptide thought to be the primary agent of toxicity in humans (2). The amanitins are heat stable and are not inactivated by cooking. Once ingested, amatoxin is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract into the portal circulation where it is taken up by hepatocytes, binding to DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (II) and halting intracellular protein synthesis, ultimately resulting in cell death (3). A lethal dose can be as low as 0.1 mg/kg, and a single mushroom can contain up to 15 mg (1). The clinical course of amatoxin poisoning is described in 3 phases: delayed gastroenteritis with significant body fluid volume loss (after a post-ingestion latency of 6-24 hours), symptomatic recovery (24-36 hours after ingestion), and fulminant hepatic and multiorgan failure (typically 3-5 days after the ingestion) (4). Patients who are evaluated early in the course of their illness might be discharged home only to return later with indications of liver failure, contributing to the relatively high case fatality rate (10-20 per cent) (5,6). Initial treatment emphasizes early supportive care including aggressive fluid and electrolyte replacement. In the event of irreversible fulminant liver failure, liver transplant might be required. A variety of therapies including multidose activated charcoal, high-dose penicillin, N-acetylcysteine, cimetidine, biliary drainage, and octreotide have been attempted with no definitive evidence of efficacy. Uncontrolled observational studies of Amanita intoxication suggest that the early use of silibinin, a milk thistle derivative, is associated with a reduction in mortality when compared with historical controls (7); however, as with the other aforementioned therapies, evidence supporting efficacy is lacking because of difficulties associated with conducting randomized controlled trials. Intravenous silibinin is licensed in Europe, and a clinical trial to evaluate its efficacy in treatment of hepatic failure induced by Amanita mushroom poisoning is currently under way in the United States.The majority of silibinin-treated patients in this report received the drug as participants of this trial. Medical providers should contact the regional poison control center or a medical toxicology consultant to assist in the management of any patient with suspected amatoxic mushroom ingestion.In California, _A. phalloides_ species grow in a symbiotic relationship with coast live oak and other hardwood trees (8). They can be especially abundant in the early wet winter months, though the foggy coastal climate and warmer temperatures can support mushroom growth throughout the year (4). In 2016, local mycologists noted an abundance of wild mushroom growth, and California county health departments reported an increase in the incidence of mushroom poisoning (9). Although weather conditions and increased numbers of _A. phalloides_ poisonings do not prove a cause and effect relationship, early seasonal rainfall and warmer subsequent temperatures made a substantial contribution to mushroom proliferation. In addition, a general increase in naive foraging and wild-crafting (that is, gathering plant material from its native environment for food or medicinal purposes) activities raises risk for poisoning.Mycologists recommend exercising caution when foraging or purchasing wild mushrooms for consumption. If wild mushrooms are to be consumed, specimens should 1st be examined, identified, and deemed edible by an experienced mycologist (4). Prompt identification of mushroom-related toxic symptoms in the ED and early, aggressive IV volume replacement are critical 1st steps in diminishing the significant morbidity and mortality associated with amatoxin ingestion. Antidotal therapies might also be considered in conjunction with a consultant experienced in hepatotoxic mushroom poisoning. In patients with severe poisoning, early contact with the nearest liver transplant center is recommended. Response to this outbreak included the notification of the local counties and state department of public health, which subsequently issued a widely distributed press release (9). Measures to disseminate information regarding the dangers of _A. phalloides_ ingestion are ongoing.[The table and references are available at the above URL. - Mod.SH]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Collecting wild mushrooms can be a fun and passionate hobby for some enthusiasts. But, as these articles illustrate, it can also be a deadly one. These mushrooms are extremely toxic, and you should have a mycologist with you, or take your prizes to a mycologist for accurate identification prior to consumption. So those who are willing to consume fungi should consider purchasing those specifically raised for consumption to perhaps decrease the huge negative effects of these toxic mushrooms. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
