Alakhbar [in French, trans. Mod.AB, edited]<http://www.fr.alakhbar.info/12579-0-Mauritanie-un-cas-suspect-de-fievre-de-la-Vallee-du-Rift-.html>A suspected case of Rift Valley fever (RVF) was discovered at the Nouakchott Hospital Center according to a source for Alakhbar.The patient is a 37-year-old Mauritanian. He was isolated upon his arrival at the hospital after the 1st medical tests revealed the existence of fever. Further in-depth analyzes are required for confirmation.The Mauritanian health authorities have often denied the existence of the virus in its 1st appearances. RVF is a disease that mainly affects animals but can contaminate humans either by mosquito bites or by contact with blood, physiological fluids, or organs of infected animals. The RVF virus was 1st identified in 1931 during an investigation of an epidemic affecting sheep in a Rift Valley farm in Kenya. --Communicated by:ProMED-MENA<promed-mena@promedmail.org>[If this case were to be definitively confirmed in the laboratory, it would have occurred almost 18 months after the series of cases, including 4 fatal cases, which Mauritania had experienced over various provinces in October 2015. At the same time, at least 4 foci of the disease occurred in sheep and goats in Brakna region (Aleg, Tidjikja, Magta-Lahjar, Kiffa).The recent episode of RVF in Niger (September 2016 to February 2017) could be the cause of the re-emergence of the disease in Mauritania because, although these 2 countries do not share a common border, there is an incessant movement of livestock between the different areas of the Sahel where nomadism is a widespread lifestyle. It would appear that veterinary surveillance in these areas is sub-optimal, and this would explain why the detection of human cases precedes that of animal cases at the origin of these cases. - Mod.ABRVF virus likely is endemic in parts of Mauritania, with cases of human and domestic animals occurring sporadically there. Mod AS provided an excellent comment on RVF previously; ""Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a peracute or acute zoonotic disease of domestic ruminants. It is caused by a single serotype of a mosquito-borne virus of the _Bunyaviridae_ family (genus _Phlebovirus_). The disease occurs in climatic conditions favouring the breeding of mosquito vectors and is characterised by abortion, neonatal mortality, and liver damage. The disease is most severe in sheep, goats and cattle. Older, non-pregnant animals, although susceptible to infection, are more resistant to clinical disease. There is considerable variation in the susceptibility to RVF of animals of different species. Camels usually have an inapparent infection with RVF virus (RVFV), but sudden mortality, neonatal mortality, and abortion occur, and abortion rates can be as high as in cattle.""Humans are susceptible to RVFV and are infected through contact with infected animal material (body fluids or tissues) or through bites from infected mosquitoes. RVFV has also caused serious infections in laboratory workers and must be handled with biosafety and biocontainment measures. It is recommended that laboratory workers be vaccinated if possible.""RVFV is endemic in many African countries and may involve several countries in the region at the same time or progressively expand geographically over the course of a few years. In addition to Africa, large outbreaks have been observed in the Arabian Peninsula and some Indian Ocean Islands. These generally, but not exclusively, follow the periodic cycles of unusually heavy rainfall, which may occur at intervals of several years, or the flooding of wide areas favouring the proliferation of mosquitoes.""Rainfall facilitates mosquito eggs to hatch. _Aedes_ mosquitoes acquire the virus from feeding on infected animals and may potentially vertically transmit the virus so that new generations of infected mosquitoes may hatch from their eggs. This provides a potential mechanism for maintaining the virus in nature, as the eggs of these mosquitoes may survive for periods of up to several years in dry conditions. Once livestock is infected, a wide variety of mosquito species may act as the vector for transmission of RVFV and can spread the disease.""Low level RVF activity may take place during inter-epizootic periods. RVF should be suspected when exceptional flooding and subsequent abundant mosquito populations are followed by the occurrence of abortions, together with fatal disease marked by necrosis and haemorrhages in the liver that particularly affect newborn lambs, kids and calves, potentially concurrent with the occurrence of an influenza-like illness in farm workers and people handling raw meat.""During an outbreak, preventive measures to protect workers from infection should be employed when there are suspicions that RVFV-infected animals or animal products are to be handled.""The above and much more information is available at <http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Health_standards/tahm/2.01.18_RVF.pdf>.""ProMED would appreciate receiving additional information including laboratory results about this case and any new ones that might appear as they become available, in addition to information on presumed location of infection as the diagnosis was made in the capital city, but no mention of where the individual came from. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/51>.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/26556>.]
