Associated Press [edited]<https://www.abqjournal.com/1013490/plague-case-reported-in-santa-fe-county.html>The state Department of Health has reported the 1st human case of plague in New Mexico in 2017. Health officials say a 63-year-old Santa Fe County man is currently hospitalized with the bacterial disease. They are conducting an environmental investigation at the man's home to look for ongoing risk and ensure the health of his immediate family and neighbors.Health Department staff also is going door-to-door near the man's home to inform them about plague found in the area and educate them on reducing their risk.Plague generally is transmitted to humans through the bites of infected fleas, but can be transmitted by direct contact with infected animals including rodents, wildlife and pets. So far there have been 10 dogs and 5 cats with confirmed plague in New Mexico in 2017.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The manifestations of _Yersinia pestis_ infection in this case, the 1st for 2017, are not stated in the report but it is likely to have been bubonic plague.2015 was a ""banner year"" for _Y. pestis_ infections in the USA with 15 cases and 4 deaths. In recent decades, an average of 7 human plague cases have been reported each year (range: 1-17 cases per year) with 0-2 deaths.The following was extracted from: Prentice MB, Rahalison L. Plague. Lancet. 2007; 369(9568): 1196-207, with the citations removed:""Some plague cases (10-25 percent) present with primary septicemia (hypotension, shock) without lymph nodes being obviously affected and these patients have higher mortality than those with bubonic plague. The term septicemic plague can be confusing, since most patients with buboes have detectable bacteremia at some stage and can also have high-density bacteremia with systemic signs of sepsis. Debate about whether septicemic plague is always secondary to frank or subclinical bubonic or pneumonic disease continues, but work in mice lends support to the existence of a syndrome of septicemic disease without histological changes in lymph nodes in a few animals infected by flea bites."" - Mod.LL][Plague may infect human beings through several routes: 1) the bite of an infected flea carried by a rodent or, rarely, other animals (mentioned previously; 2) direct contact with contaminated tissues, generally from an animal; or 3) in rare cases, inhalation of respiratory secretions from infected people or animals. Clinical signs in pets involve a localized swelling, such as under the jaw in cats, but also in the inguinal region or under the front leg (the armpit, if you will), lethargy, anorexia, and fever. These clinical signs may be present in the dog as well. Swelling under the jaw in cats is frequently mistaken as a cat fight abscess. Please take your pet to a veterinarian if you notice any abnormalities. Be sure to consult your veterinarian if you find a lump on your pet, as well as to get the best flea prevention treatment for your pet. It may be necessary to have your yard and/or home treated for fleas. Vacuum your home, including any bedding and furniture, and immediately upon finishing take the vacuum back outside, seal it in a plastic bag, and dispose of it. This type of cleaning will have to be repeated every week for 4-6 weeks to break the cycle of the flea in the home. This disease should be taken seriously, so please be sure your pet is on some form of flea prevention. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/233>.]
