Virol-mycol DOI: 10.4172/2161-0517-C1-020 [edited]<https://www.omicsonline.org/proceedings/neurologic-complications-of-dengue-virus-infection-65020.html>Amita Jain. Neurologic complications of dengue virus infection---------------------------AbstractStatement of the Problem: Dengue virus infection is an extremely common mosquito borne infection in the world. Neurologic complications are increasingly being reported in dengue cases affecting both the central and peripheral nervous system. This session is aimed to discuss the incidence and clinical spectrum of neurologic complications of dengue, methods of their diagnosis, management and outcome in patients with dengue virus infection.Methodology & Theoretical Orientation: An extensive review of the published literature was carried out using PubMed, Scopus and Google Scholar databases. The keywords used were: ""Dengue AND Neurological"", ""Dengue AND Neuropathy"", ""Dengue AND Plexopathy"", ""Dengue AND Acute Encephalitis Syndrome"", ""Dengue AND Encephalopathy"". Findings: The neurologic manifestations may be seen in 0.5-7.4 percent of dengue cases. These include encephalopathy, encephalitis, aseptic meningitis, stroke (intracranial hemorrhages or thrombosis), myelitis, Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome, plexus involvement (brachial plexopathy, neuralgic amyotrophy, lumbosacral plexoopathy), nerve involvement (mononeuropathies, polyneuropathies) and muscle involvement (myalgias, myositis, rhabdomyolysis, hypokalemic paralysis). Diagnosis of dengue virus infection may be made by a combination of dengue NS1Ag/Real Time PCR and anti-IgM antibody in CSF. In serum samples, dengue infection may be confirmed by PCR/culture positivity, IgM detection or by 4-fold rise in titers of specific IgG antibodies in paired serum samples. Conclusion & Significance: In endemic regions, dengue should be considered as a differential diagnosis of neurological disorders. Early recognition of these complications is required for proper management of cases and for preventing further disabilities.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[As indicated in this report and the one following it, dengue virus infections should be considered among the rule-outs for neurological disorders in patients who recently have been in areas of dengue virus transmission. - Mod.TY]******[3] Dengue 4 virus encephalitisDate: Thu 4 May 2017Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005369>Deborah H. L. Ng, Sapna P. Sadarangani. ""Locked in a cage""--A case of dengue virus 4 encephalitis.---------------------------A 62-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to the hospital with a 4-day history of fever associated with chills, rigors, and headache. She also complained of postural giddiness, 5 episodes of vomiting, and shortness of breath on exertion for one day. She denied any abdominal pain or bleeding manifestations. Her past medical history was unremarkable, and she had not travelled out of Singapore.[Clinical details are presented followed by a discussion]The presenting caseOur patient with DENV-4 infection developed new acute neurological symptoms of confusion and expressive aphasia at day 6 of her acute dengue illness. CSF showed lymphocytic pleocytosis with a positive CSF dengue IgM and IgG. Testing for other pathogens in CSF was negative. She had not travelled to areas endemic for other flaviviruses. Although DENV-4 has been reported to potentially cause encephalitis, those cases were fatal, with multiorgan involvement and dengue haemorrhagic fever. By contrast, our patient had no other features of severe dengue, such as severe plasma leakage, bleeding, or other organ impairment. This is the 1st known case of DENV-4 encephalitis with complete recovery.Key learning points- Dengue encephalitis is rare, but clinicians should be aware of the diagnostic criteria and consider the diagnosis in endemic areas.- In areas that are also endemic for other flaviviruses, co-infection needs to be differentiated from cross-reactive serology.- Brain imaging may be helpful but does not confirm or exclude the diagnosis of dengue encephalitis by itself, and CSF analysis for dengue PCR and serology is also important.- Pathogenesis of neurological manifestations of dengue leading to encephalitis are incompletely understood but could include direct neural invasion with intrathecal antibody synthesis or alterations in the blood-brain barrier.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This report will be of interest to infectious disease physicians and neurologists attending patients in dengue endemic areas. - Mod.TY]******[4] Dengue neutralizing antibodiesDate: Mon 15 May 2017Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005554>Bhumi Patel, Patti Longo, Michael J. Miley, Magelda Montoya, Eva Harris, Aravinda M. de Silva. Dissecting the human serum antibody response to secondary dengue virus infections.---------------------------AbstractDengue viruses (DENVs) are mosquito-borne flaviviruses and the causative agents of dengue fever and dengue hemorrhagic fever. As there are 4 serotypes of DENV (DENV1-4), people can be infected multiple times, each time with a new serotype. Primary infections stimulate antibodies that mainly neutralize the serotype of infection (type-specific), whereas secondary infections stimulate responses that cross-neutralize 2 or more serotypes. Previous studies have demonstrated that neutralizing antibodies induced by primary infections recognize tertiary and quaternary structure epitopes on the viral envelope (E) protein that are unique to each serotype. The goal of the current study was to determine the properties of neutralizing antibodies induced after secondary infection with a different (heterotypic) DENV serotypes. We evaluated whether polyclonal neutralizing antibody responses after secondary infections consist of distinct populations of type-specific antibodies to each serotype encountered or a new population of broadly cross-neutralizing antibodies. We observed 2 types of responses: in some individuals exposed to secondary infections, DENV neutralization was dominated by cross-reactive antibodies, whereas in other individuals both type-specific and cross-reactive antibodies contributed to neutralization. To better understand the origins of type-specific and cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies, we analyzed sera from individuals with well-documented sequential infections with 2 DENV serotypes only. These individuals had both type-specific and cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies to the 2 serotypes responsible for infection and only cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies to other serotypes. Collectively, the results demonstrate that the quality of neutralizing (and presumably protective) antibodies are different in individuals depending on the number of previous exposures to different DENV serotypes. We propose a model in which low affinity, cross-reactive antibody secreting B-cell clones induced by primary exposure evolve during each secondary infection to secrete higher affinity and more broadly neutralizing antibodies.Author summaryThe 4 dengue virus serotypes are emerging mosquito-borne flaviviruses and the causative agents of dengue fever and dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome. Infected people develop protective immunity to the infecting serotype but remain susceptible to secondary infections with new serotypes. Both antibodies and T-cells are responsible for protection against re-infection by the same serotype. The goal of the current study was to analyze the properties of antibodies in people who have been exposed to a single or secondary dengue virus infections. We found that people exposed to a single infection have neutralizing antibodies that mainly bind sites that are unique to the infecting serotype. In contrast, secondary infections induced more complex mixtures of neutralizing antibodies that target regions that unique to each serotype and regions that are conserved between serotypes. Our results have implications for understanding protective responses after natural infections as well as responses induced by dengue vaccines.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This finding will be very relevant to an understanding of immune responses to the dengue vaccines currently under development. The intent for development of these tetravalent vaccines is to provide neutralizing antibody with solid immunity concurrently to all 4 DENV serotypes. - Mod.TY]
