Choice [edited]<https://www.choice.com.au/food-and-drink/food-warnings-and-safety/food-safety/articles/frozen-berry-recall-linked-to-2015-hep-a-outbreak-050617>Sparking the 2nd nationwide frozen berry recall after a previous outbreak in 2015, 4 cases of hepatitis A have been linked to Creative Gourmet's Mixed Berries. Supplier Entyce Foods has initiated a recall of 48 000 Creative Gourmet's Mixed Berries in 300 gram packs, most of which were sold at independent supermarkets by March 2017. Entyce stopped sales of the suspect berries after the 1st reported case on 4 May 2017, but the actual recall did not start until a month later on 3 Jun 2017.The authority overseeing the recall, Food Standards Australia and New Zealand, has confirmed that 4 people have been affected in states including Queensland, Victoria, and South Australia. The berries are believed to be linked to the same stock reserves responsible for the last hepatitis A scare in 2015, when both Nanna's range of frozen berries and Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries were owned by the same company.""We purchased the Creative Gourmet brand and some existing stock reserves from Patties in late 2015,"" says Ivone Ruiz, the General Manager of Entyce Food Ingredients. ""The stock had been extensively tested by independent accredited laboratories, all of which cleared the batch for traces of the hepatitis A.""But Food Standards Australia and New Zealand suggests the batches are related. ""These cases have an identical sequence [of hepatitis A] to that of the cases from the 2015 outbreak,"" says a spokesperson. ""This product was not in the market at the time of the 2015 recall."" A representative from the Department of Health and Human Services in Victoria suggests how the batch could have evaded testing. ""There is a possible link. They came in at a similar time to [Nanna's] berries, but they came in before the test-and-hold [procedures were] put in place at the border,"" spokesperson Bram Alexander tells CHOICE.Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries contain strawberries, raspberries and blackberries from China, as well as blueberries sourced from Canada. The berries are packaged in China before being shipped to Australia and are then repackaged in Melbourne.Entyce says it's decreasing its reliance on berries sourced from China having recognized ""a level of concern that exists in the community"".""When we took over the Creative Gourmet brand, over 95 percent of the fruit was sourced from China; we have brought this figure down to 5 percent,"" Entyce's Ruiz tells CHOICE. ""With a number of sourcing contracts expected to cease shortly, 100 percent of all fruit used in the Creative Gourmet brand will be sourced from Canada, Chile, Brazil and Vietnam.""The recalled batch of Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries carries the number PP150118, and has a best by date of 15 Jan 2021. The packs were sold at independent supermarkets including IGA, Foodworks, Foodland, SPAR, and Supabarn, among others. People are advised to return all packets -- whether sealed or opened -- to the place of purchase for a full refund.[Byline: Tony Ibrahim]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is interesting that the virus seems linked genetically to an outbreak from more than 2 years ago.The following was extracted from ProMED post Hepatitis A - Italy: frozen berries 20140919.2784633 containing a Eurosurveillance report on the outbreak of hepatitis associated with frozen berries in Europe (Eurosurveillance Edition 2014, 19(37): pii=20906; <http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20906>), with the citations within the report removed:""Consumption of fresh or frozen produce is known to be associated with outbreaks of foodborne enteric viruses, particularly norovirus and HAV. Produce (fruits and vegetables) can become contaminated during cultivation prior to harvest due to contact with inadequately treated sewage or sewage-polluted water, or fomites. Contamination may also occur by infected food handlers, during harvesting, processing, storage, distribution, or final preparation, with the virus likely to be found on the surface of the food. Fruits and vegetables are more prone to being vehicles of food-borne infections, as they are more likely to be left uncooked before consumption. Berries as a vehicle for transmission of HAV have been described in several outbreaks, with most of the infections connected to consumption of minimally processed frozen berries.""Furthermore, it has been shown that among berries (frozen raspberries in particular) and vegetables (that is, parsley), those with uneven shapes are more likely to retain viruses on their surface. Raspberries, for example, have crevices and hair-like projections, which may prevent the virus from being removed by rinsing.""Recently, outbreaks connected to berry consumption have been reported in some Nordic European countries (Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden) and in the United States. The outbreak in Nordic countries was associated with frozen strawberries, while the outbreak in the United States was associated with Townsend Farms Organic Antioxidant Blend, a frozen blend containing a pomegranate seed mix. However, the virus genotype 1A isolated in a 2014 Italian outbreak was different from the virus genotypes implicated in the above mentioned recent outbreaks (genotype 1B), which also have frozen strawberries and berries as the suspected vehicles."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/186>.]
