NBC Chicago [edited]<http://www.nbcchicago.com/news/local/Tick-Bite-May-Have-Caused-2-Year-Old-Indiana-Girls-Death-427070181.html>A tick bite may have led to the death of a young Indiana girl who fell dangerously ill in a matter of days last week [week 29 May to 4 Jun 2017], family members said. WTHR reports that a 2-year-old, of Plainfield, died [Sun 4 Jun 2017], after her family suspected she was infected with Rocky Mountain Spotted fever [RMSF] following a tick bite during a camping trip.Family members said it took only 1 week for the girl's health to deteriorate. ""Within less than like 5 days,"" a family friend said, who was asked to speak on the grieving family's behalf, told WTHR. ""Her little body couldn't handle it.""First, the girl tested positive for strep throat. But the young girl's fever continued to climb to nearly 104 degrees. ""They just couldn't break it,"" the family friend told the news outlet. The child died at Riley Hospital for Children in Indianapolis [Sun 4 Jun 2017]. The family had said physicians suspected K was suffering from Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, but confirmation from testing could take up to 2 weeks to complete.The CDC reports Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever can be fatal if not treated in the first few days of symptoms. Symptoms include fever, headache, abdominal pain, vomiting and muscle pain. In many cases, a rash may also develop, but that can take days to appear, if at all, health officials said. ""The progression of the disease varies greatly,"" according to the CDC's website. ""Patients who are treated early may recover quickly on outpatient medication, while those who experience a more severe course may require intravenous antibiotics, prolonged hospitalization or intensive care."" Health officials note that in children, symptoms including a cough, sore throat and diarrhea may be seen, which ""can lead to misdiagnosis.""The death comes amid numerous alerts from health departments across the Midwest warning of tickborne illnesses, particularly as warm weather approaches. The Illinois Department of Public Health warned residents [Wed 7 Jun 2017] about a rise in ticks across the area.""A bite from a tick can cause anywhere from mild to severe illness, and even death in some cases, so it is important to protect yourself against bites,"" Director Nirav D. Shah said in a statement. The DuPage County Health Department sent out a similar alert.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[When the female tick harboring the organism attaches to a passing human, she usually starts low on the body after transferring from grassy vegetation or even directly or indirectly from a dog. After crawling around on clothes seeking an appropriate cutaneous site (wearing white clothes makes a wandering tick easier to spot), she attaches and begins to feed.If not already partially fed, after attaching, it generally takes 24 hours to activate and transmit the rickettsial organism. For this reason, daily or twice-daily tick checks with removal will minimize disease transmission. Ticks that attach in hairy areas such as the scalp or beard may be more difficult to find.The incubation period of the disease is about a week after the tick exposure, long after the tick has detached. The presenting illness is generally nonspecific, fever, muscle pains, headache (but the headache is usually described as quite severe). The rash begins on day 3 of the illness, initially maculopapular at the wrists and ankles before becoming petechial and purpuric, involving the palms and soles as well as spreading proximally to the trunk. Purpura usually is not seen before the 6th day of illness. The mortality is indeed quite low if treatment (usually a tetracycline) is begun during the 1st 2 days of the rash or before.Empiric treatment for this infection should always be begun in people with compatible symptoms inhabiting endemic areas during the spring and summer, even if no tick bite is known.The early rash of this disease can be seen at <http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d2/Rocky_Mountain_spotted_fever_PHIL_1962_lores.jpg>.Delayed diagnosis contributes to morbidity and mortality of RMSF. The tetracyclines represent the best drug for treatment, even in children, and the following is the CDC statement in this regard <https://www.cdc.gov/rmsf/doxycycline/index.html>:Background on doxycycline and older tetracycline antimicrobials---------------------------------------------------------------Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum antimicrobials in use since the 1940s. Older tetracycline-class drugs have been linked to cosmetic staining of permanent teeth when used in children before the age of 8 years. As a result, in 1970 a warning label was attached to all tetracycline-class antibiotics advising against the use in children under the age of 8 years.In 1967 doxycycline was introduced as a newer tetracycline-class antibiotic. Doxycycline binds less readily to calcium and has not been shown to cause the same tooth staining. Several studies have previously been published showing the lack of staining of permanent teeth when doxycycline was used in children. The warning, currently present on all tetracycline-class antibiotics, including doxycycline, continues to mention the concern regarding dental staining.Doxycycline and rickettsial diseases------------------------------------Doxycycline is the most effective treatment of all rickettsial diseases including RMSF, ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. It is the antimicrobial recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and CDC for the treatment of suspected rickettsial diseases in patients of all ages. Studies have shown that other antimicrobials are less effective and are associated with a higher number of deaths (case fatality rate).In a 2012 national survey, 80 per cent of clinicians correctly selected doxycycline as the treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in persons 8 years or older, however, only 35 per cent of clinicians correctly chose doxycycline as the treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in children under 8 years. This hesitation may contribute to the increased fatality rate among children. Children under the age of 10 years represent less than 6 per cent of RMSF cases, but they represent 22 per cent of deaths. The same disproportionate case fatality rate in children has been observed for ehrlichiosis and other serious rickettsial infections.Doxycycline is most effective when given within the first 5 days of illness. Because there is no rapid test to diagnose rickettsial diseases, clinicians must diagnose and treat based on clinical suspicion alone. It is important that concern about dental staining [should] not cause providers to use other antibiotics, or delay the start of treatment in children.The newest evidence-------------------In 2013, researchers from CDC and the Indian Health Service [IHS] began looking into the issue of dental staining following doxycycline usage, to better understand if this is an issue. This study was performed to look at whether or not doxycycline, in the dose and duration used to treat suspected RMSF, caused dental staining in children less than 8 years. The study took place in a community which has suffered from high rates of RMSF since 2003, where a large number of people, including children, were treated with doxycycline.Dentists inspected the permanent teeth of children who had received doxycycline for suspected RMSF prior to their 8th birthday and those who had not. Blinded dentists (without knowing which children had received the drug) looked for tooth staining, evaluated tooth color, and looked for evidence of weakness in the tooth enamel for all children in the study. No differences were found between children who had received doxycycline and those who had not.This study provides the largest sample size and best evidence to date that short courses of doxycycline (such as those used to treat rickettsial diseases) do not cause dental staining when given to children under the age of 8 years.The current label allows for the use of doxycycline in pediatric rickettsial patients because other antimicrobials are not likely to be effective for treatment. However, clearer language on the drug label may help avoid hesitation in prescribing life-saving doxycycline to children, and reinforce CDC and AAP RMSF treatment recommendations. Despite the current label warning, it is important for healthcare providers to know that doxycycline has not been shown to cause tooth staining in the dose and duration used to treat rickettsial diseases. Early administration of doxycycline in adults and children can prevent severe illness and save lives. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/217>.]
