Global Polio Eradication Initiative [edited]<http://polioeradication.org/news-post/circulating-vaccine-derived-poliovirus-type-2-confirmed-in-syria/>A circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreak has been confirmed in the Deir-Ez-Zor [Deir Al Zour] Governorate of the Syrian Arab Republic. The virus strain was isolated from 2 cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), with onset of paralysis on [5 March 2017 and 6 May 2017], as well as from a healthy child in the same community.Outbreak response plans are being finalized, in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols, including plans for targeted vaccination campaigns to rapidly raise population immunity. An initial risk analysis has been conducted, finding low overall population immunity levels in the area but solid levels of disease surveillance. Active searches are being conducted for additional cases of acute flaccid paralysis. Surveillance and immunization activities are also being strengthened in neighboring countries.Although access to Deir-Ez-Zor is compromised due to insecurity, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using bivalent oral polio vaccine ([bOPV]). However, only limited coverage was possible through these campaigns. Syria also introduced 2 doses of inactivated polio vaccine in the infant routine immunization schedule in 2018 [As we are not yet in 2018 it is unclear if the plans are to introduce the IPV in 2018 or if it has already been introduced and should read 2017 or 2016. - Mod.MPP].The detection of the cases demonstrates that disease surveillance systems are functional in Syria. The polio programme is working with local authorities and organizations on the ground to respond immediately, using proven strategies. In 2013-2014, Deir-Ez-Zor was the epicentre of a wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) outbreak, resulting in 36 cases at the time. This outbreak was successfully stopped; the now-detected cVDPV2 strain is unrelated to the WPV1 outbreak.Circulating VDPVs are extremely rare forms of poliovirus, mutated from strains in the oral polio vaccine (OPV) that can emerge in under-immunized populations. OPV has been a critical tool in eliminating 99.9 percent of polio cases worldwide, and while cVDPV is rare, the GPEI is actively working with countries to eradicate both vaccine-derived and wild polio. The same strategies that are eliminating wild poliovirus also stop cVDPV - it remains critical that all countries maintain strong disease surveillance and ensure all children are vaccinated.Global Polio Eradication InitiativeWorld Health OrganizationAvenue Appia 20,1211 Geneva 27Switzerland--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/86>. The Deir Al Zour Govenorate is located near the border with Iraq.  - Mod.MPP]******[2] Syria cVDPV2 - mediaDate: Thu 8 Jun 2017Source: STAT News [edited]<https://www.statnews.com/2017/06/08/polio-outbreak-syria-who/>An outbreak of vaccine-related polio cases has been reported in war-torn Syria, the World Health Organization announced [Thu 8 Jun 2017] another hurdle for a nearly 30-year eradication effort that has seen more than its share of setbacks.A total of 2 children in the Deir-Ez-Zor governorate in eastern Syria have been paralyzed by the vaccine viruses. The virus has been recovered from a 3rd child who was not paralyzed. All signs point to vaccine viruses that are circulating in the area.Detailed planning is already underway for emergency vaccination programs to reach about 200 000 children in the region, Michel Zaffran, head of the WHO's polio program, told STAT. The government of Syria has made a formal request for the emergency vaccination effort, he said.Given the 6-year-old civil war in that country, the endeavor will be logistically challenging. But Syria experienced a polio outbreak in 2013 and 2014, and it was extinguished.In that case, the outbreak was caused by so-called wild polioviruses. The new cases are vaccine-derived polioviruses [VDPV] viruses from the oral polio vaccine used in some developing countries -- and not an indication that the viruses are spreading as they are in Afghanistan and Pakistan, believed to be the only 2 countries in the world where wild polioviruses still circulate.""It's still complex,"" Zaffran admitted.The Global Polio Eradication Initiative has a long history of operating in places of political instability and has been successful in the past in negotiating so-called ""days of tranquility"" in which ceasefires allow vaccination teams to reach otherwise hard-to-reach children.In mid-May [2017], an anonymous contributor reported to the online disease surveillance system ProMED that there was a cluster of children who had suffered what's called acute flaccid paralysis [AFP] in Syria. Sudden onset of paralysis can be caused by a number of things, but in parts of the world where polio is still a threat, it must be ruled out when such cases arise.The polio program has received reports of 58 children in the region who have recently experienced acute flaccid paralysis. Testing showed the vaccine viruses were not responsible in 11 of these cases, but further testing remains to be done on samples from the others.Getting samples from Deir-Ez-Zor to laboratories in Damascus and Ankara that can do the testing isn't easy or quick.""This is still a work in progress,"" Zaffran said. ""We have samples that have reached the lab that have tested negative. We have samples that have reached the lab and have not yet been completely tested. And we have samples that have been collected that are still stuck in Syria and are not yet transported.""Oral polio vaccine is made using live but weakened viruses; the original formulation contained components to protect against all 3 polioviruses, types 1 through 3. Type 2 polioviruses stopped circulating nearly 20 years ago.While highly effective, the oral vaccine has some rare but serious side effects. The weakened viruses can spread from a vaccinated child to other children, with whom he or she is in contact, also passively vaccinating them. But as the viruses spread from child to child they can mutate to become virulent again, regaining the power to cripple.That's what has happened in Syria. And there may be more cases, Zaffran acknowledged.Genetic analysis shows the viruses from the 3 children are related and have been circulating for a period of about 2 years, Zaffran said. The fact that vaccine viruses have been circulating for that long suggests a lot of children in the region have not been successfully immunized against polio.""That can only happen in populations that have low immunity,"" he said.The type 2 component of the oral polio vaccine is the most likely of the 3 to regain virulence. As a result, last year [2016] in a globally coordinated maneuver called ""the switch"" all countries that use oral vaccine had to stop administering the 3-component type and adopt a version that only protects against type 1 and type 3 polioviruses.But supplies of a special monovalent or single-strain vaccine that protects against type 2 polio have been stockpiled in case outbreaks like the type in Syria crop up. This is the vaccine that will be used in this emergency response.Zaffran said response planners are hoping to move quickly but must ensure that the effort is effective at reaching as many children as possible.That's because they know putting more type 2 vaccine viruses into an environment where there are unimmunized children risks igniting future outbreaks like this one.""Speed is relatively important but quality is going to be even more important,"" Zaffran said. ""We want to really interrupt the transmission, protect the population and ensure that we don't seed more of these ... [outbreaks]. So it's going to be important to do it very properly.""[Byline: Helen Branswell]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur George A Robertson******[3] Global update - GPEIDate: Thu 8 Jun 2017Source: Global Polio Eradication Initiative [edited]<http://polioeradication.org/polio-today/polio-now/this-week/>Poliovirus Weekly Update07-Jun-2017, World Health OrganizationNew wild poliovirus cases reported this week: 0Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2017: 5Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2016: 37New cVDPV cases reported this week: 2Total number of cVDPV cases in 2017: 6Total number of cVDPV cases in 2016: 5Headlines - In Syria, a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreak has been confirmed. The virus strain was isolated from 2 cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) and one healthy contact, from Deir-Ez-Zor governorate. - The final decision made by the World Health Assembly on 29 May 2017 on polio transition planning is now available online. The decision follows extensive discussions by Member States on the need to address the challenge of scaling down the polio programme as eradication comes closer, including the potential impact on achieving and sustaining a polio-free world, on health system programmes and on systems currently supported by polio assets. Delegates welcomed existing efforts to plan for the post-polio world, and stressed the importance of care, considered and strategic approaches to the transition of polio assets, requesting the Director-General to prepare a detailed transition action plan. - Summary of newly-reported viruses this week: Syria - 2 new circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) isolated from acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases and one cVDPV2 isolated from a healthy contact; and, Pakistan - 4 new environmental sample positive for wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1).Afghanistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of cases for 2017 remains 3, and for 2016 remains 13. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [Tue 21 Feb 2017], from Kunduz province. - With most of Afghanistan polio-free, efforts are focused on continuing to strengthen operations, in close coordination with Pakistan, to address remaining low-level transmission in the common reservoir area of the Quetta-Kandahar corridor. - Afghanistan is carrying out a programme review focusing on the implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan and making necessary adjustments for the 2nd half of 2017. - Polio eradication teams from East and South East Afghanistan and neighboring FATA and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan met in Kabul on 24 - 25 May 2017 to review the current coordination mechanisms and agree on additional measures to further improve implementation in the WPV common reservoirs. Core teams from the National Emergency Operation Centres Afghanistan and Pakistan also met to discuss next steps on further improving the vaccination strategies for high risk mobile populations.Pakistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 2, and for 2016 remains 20. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [13 Feb 2017], from Diamir district, Gilgit Baltistan. - A total of 4 new positive WPV1 environmental samples were reported in the past week, from Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) collected on 10 May 2017; and, Karachi Gadap, Karachi Landhi and Sukkur, Sindh, collected on 8, 16 and 12 May 2017, respectively. - The year 2016 saw the lowest ever annual number of polio cases in the country but poliovirus continues to be isolated through environmental surveillance over a significant geographical range. Efforts are ongoing through implementation of the national emergency action plan to address remaining gaps in coverage and surveillance, in close coordination with neighboring Afghanistan. - The National Polio Management Team is meeting on [8 - 9 June 2017] to review implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan during the low transmission season, and to agree on essential adjustments to the plan for the 2nd half of 2017.Nigeria - No new cases of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2016 remains 4 and no cases have been reported in 2017. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [21 Aug 2016] in Monguno Local Government Area (LGA), Borno. - Nigeria continues to implement emergency response to the detected WPV1 strain and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains affecting the country. - The response is part of a broader regional outbreak response, coordinated with neighboring countries, in particular the Lake Chad sub-region, including northern Cameroon, parts of Central African Republic, Chad and southern Niger. - Detection of the polio cases in Nigeria underscores the risk posed by low-level undetected transmission and the urgent need to strengthen subnational surveillance.Lake Chad Basin - The detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Nigeria poses a risk to the neighboring countries of the Lake Chad basin and hence an outbreak response plan is being implemented as part of the response to the Nigeria outbreak. - Emergency outbreak response efforts continue across the Lake Chad basin, together with activities to fill subnational surveillance gaps across the region.Central Africa - No new cases were reported in the past week. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo) is affected by 2 separate outbreaks of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), in Haut Lomami province (2 cases, with onset of paralysis on [8 Mar 2017 and 20 Feb 2017]); and in Maniema province (2 cases with onset of paralysis on [26 Mar 2017 and 18 Apr 2017], with an additional isolate detected in a healthy individual with sample collection on 2 May 2017). - Outbreak response plans are currently being finalized, with supplementary immunization activities using monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2) in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighboring countries. - DR Congo is also affected by an Ebola outbreak, in Bas Uele province in the north of the country. Coordination among both outbreak response teams will be necessary and teams are already working on this.Syrian Arab Republic - In Syria, a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreak has been confirmed. The virus strain was isolated from 2 cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) and one healthy contact (collection date: 25 April 2017), from Deir-Ez-Zor governorate. The cases had onset of paralysis on [5 Mar 2017 and 6 May 2017]. - No case of WPV1 has been reported in Syria since 21 Jan 2014. - Outbreak response plans are being finalized, in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Although access to Deir-Ez-Zor is compromised due to insecurity, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using the bivalent oral polio vaccine (OPV). However, only limited coverage was possible through these campaigns.Officially reported wild poliovirus cases as of 06 Jun 2017Total global cases in 2017: 5 (compared with 16 for the same period in 2016)Total in endemic countries in 2017: 5 (compared with 16 for the same period in 2016)Total in non-endemic countries in 2017: 0 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016) - Afghanistan: 3 cases in 2017 (compared with 5 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21-Feb-17 - Pakistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 11 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 13-Feb-17 - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21-Aug-16 - Total global cases in 2016: 37 - Total in endemic countries: 37 - Total in non-endemic countries: 0Officially reported cVDPV cases as of 06 Jun 2017Total global cases in 2017: 6 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016) - Syrian Arab Republic: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 06-May-17 - Democratic Republic of the Congo: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 18-Apr-17 - Pakistan: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 17-Dec-16 - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 28-Oct-16 - Lao People's Democratic Republic: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 11-Jan-16 - Total global cases in 2016: 5 - Total in endemic countries: 2 - Total in non-endemic countries: 3--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED-mail 1st learned of the suspected polio cases in Syria on 2 May 2016 with further information from the EpiCore Surveillance Project that a cVDPV was suspected on 6 May 2016 (see Poliomyelitis update (06): Syria (DY), cVDPV susp 20170512.5032401 and Poliomyelitis update (05): Syria (DY) susp, RFI 20170506.5015784). In these prior reports, there was mention that there was a cluster of 23 AFP [acute flaccid paralysis] cases in Miadin district and that specimens were being sent to CDC in Atlanta for confirmation. From the above reports, it appears as though there has been confirmation of 2 cases of polio associated with a cVDPV2 infection, and a 3rd asymptomatic contact, also infected with the cVDPV2, but in section [2] the number of suspected cases of AFP is now at 58, with 11 infections ruled out to date, but many more remain to be tested so we should expect further updates (and possibly more confirmed cases) as the information becomes available.The detailed discussion of these cases and the challenges facing both the outbreak control as well preventing additional future cases of cVDPV2 are well covered in Helen Branswell's article presented in [2] above.The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/86>.With respect to the global update presented in section [3] above, the main changes are the update on Syria and the continued isolation of wild polioviruses (WPVs) in environmental samples in Pakistan. The good news is that there are still only 5 cases of polio attributable to WPV infection reported worldwide this year (2017), with the most recent date of onset of illness reported to be in February of 2017 (the 13th in Pakistan and the 21st in Afghanistan). The not so good news is the continued isolation of WPV1 from environmental samples in Pakistan and the occurrence and identification of cVDPVs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Syria and possibly Mozambique (see Poliomyelitis update (07): Mozambique, Congo DR, VDPV, RFI 20170525.5060299).A map showing the locations of both WPV and cVDPV cases can be found at: <http://polioeradication.org/polio-today/polio-now/>. - Mod.MPP]
