BBC NEWS [edited]<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-40257385>Hundreds of people have fallen ill and a child has died of suspected food poisoning at a camp for displaced people near the Iraqi city of Mosul [Nineveh province].People were said to be vomiting and suffering dehydration after an iftar meal, to break the daily Ramadan fast. The Hasansham U2 camp, between Mosul and Irbil, houses people displaced by an Iraqi offensive to capture Mosul from so-called Islamic State (IS). IS fighters are currently under heavy siege in the west of the city.The UN refugee agency, UNHCR, said in a statement that around 800 cases had been recorded, 200 of whom were taken to hospital. One woman receiving treatment told the agency: ""We felt stomach pains as soon as we ate. We felt we couldn't breathe and then saw that our neighbors were all suffering at the same time.""Unconfirmed reports say a 2nd person, a woman, has died. The UNHCR said it was ""extremely concerned"" by the events at the camp. ""Staff have been working closely overnight to co-ordinate the response with other agencies and the relevant authorities... to ensure that those who have fallen ill were able to receive swift medical treatment and that the seriously sick were provided transport to nearby hospitals,"" the statement said.The food, containing beans, chicken, and yoghurt, was prepared in a restaurant in Irbil and brought to the camp by a Qatari charity, Rudaw news agency added. It quoted camp supervisor Rizgar Obed as saying that outside organisations had previously been banned from bringing in food, but the camp authorities had been forced ""under great pressure"" to change the regulations.The camp is one of 13 built by the UNHCR in the Mosul area to cope with people fleeing from the city and surrounding villages. It currently houses 6235 people. More than 800 000 people -- about 1/3 of the pre-war population of Mosul -- have been displaced since October 2016, 633 000 of them from the west of the city.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[With an incubation period of seemingly minutes, the possible etiology of the illness here is quite limited and may not be a bacterial-produced toxin. ProMED would like more information regarding these illnesses.It is possible that laboratory testing will show a food item to be contaminated with high levels of _Staphylococcus aureus_. Food can become contaminated if a person with a staph infection has an uncovered lesion or sore that comes in contact with food or food processing equipment. _Staphylococcus aureus_ bacteria and toxin can contaminate foods or equipment. Staphylococcal enterotoxins are fast acting, sometimes causing illness in as little as 30 minutes but usually in 4-6 hours, with nausea, vomiting, stomach cramps, and little if any fever or diarrhea. The patients usually recover within a day. When occurring in a population that is malnourished and already somewhat dehydrated, mortality may occur.A very short incubation of a vomiting-associated illness (less than 1 hour) suggests that the etiology was heavy metal ingestion. A number of metals can cause this type of syndrome, which is usually caused by the ingestion of a liquid that had been kept in a metallic container. These metals include antimony, copper, tin, and zinc. The illnesses are usually self-limiting and require only symptomatic care. In addition to vomiting, other clues may include the liquid being described as having a metallic taste. Identifying the specific cause requires analysis of the food or liquid vehicle. Some potential differences in the illnesses exist between causes include a longer incubation period (several hours) for zinc, vomiting and diarrhea for tin, and blue or green vomitus for copper.It is also possible that a chemical poisoning occurred in this large episode. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9591>.]
