globo.com, G1 [in Portuguese, machine trans., edited]<http://g1.globo.com/distrito-federal/noticia/bombeiros-do-df-sao-infectados-durante-treinamento-em-caverna.ghtml>Firefighters who attended a rescue course in a cave in BrazlÌ¢ndia, Federal District, are hospitalized with suspected histoplasmosis - an infection caused by inhaling spores from a fungus that is found in bird feces and bat guano. The training took place between [16 and 19 May 2017], but only now did the symptoms begin to be felt by the group. The information was confirmed by the DF Health Department and the Fire Department.According to the Department, at least 18 people, including students and instructors, had headaches and a persistent fever. A total of 11 are being treated at the Hospital Maria Auxiliadora, a private institution in the Gama region, and a military man is hospitalized at the Regional Hospital of the North Wing (Hran). The other soldiers have been discharged. The briefing said 25 firefighters participated in the training. All the soldiers are in epidemiological investigation and will be monitored.In G1, firefighters said that during the test preparation, the instructors of the corporation did not realize the amount of bats that were in the cave. In a statement, the Health Department said that a Health Surveillance team inspected the cave and that the area was isolated. At around 3:45 pm on [Fri 9 Jun 2017], firefighters sent a note on the case and said they are being provided all necessary support to the military involved:""Faced with the news published in some information vehicles about the situation involving the military of the corporation, the Fire Brigade of the Federal District of the DF is public to clarify that:""Due to the nature of the activities of the Fire Department, which includes search and rescue activities in inhospitable places, it is necessary to prepare the military adequately for missions in wilderness and caves, whose training takes place through specialization courses such as Operational Crew Course.""Thus, the CBMDF military underwent natural search and rescue training in the Brazlandia region, about 15 days ago. After a week of training, some military personnel began to present flu-like symptoms, with fever and respiratory discomfort, which persisted after the use of medication commonly indicated for these cases, leading them to seek medical attention for a more accurate diagnosis.""Faced with this, the CBMDF highlighted a medical epidemiologist of the corporation to follow up the cases and take the measures that the case requires.""""The information updated as of today [Fri 9 Jun 2017], indicates that 10 soldiers were hospitalized in the hospital network, and 1 has already been discharged and another 2 are expected to be discharged soon, due to the clinical picture they present. In addition, 10 military personnel also sought care and did not require hospitalization.""In addition, we inform you that the Epidemiological Surveillance and Sanitary Surveillance of the Health Department were activated to monitor and confirm the initial diagnosis. The Fire Department explains that it has provided all necessary support to the military involved, appointing a specialized medical staff to follow up on the case.""[Byline: LetÌ cia Carvalho and Mara Puljiz]--Communicated by:ProMED-PORTpromed@promedmail.org[As a review, the following was obtained from Medscape <http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/299054-overview#showall>:""_Histoplasma capsulatum_ is a dimorphic fungus that remains in a mycelial form at ambient temperatures and grows as yeast at body temperature in mammals. Infection causes histoplasmosis. Although the fungus that causes histoplasmosis can be found in temperate climates throughout the world, it is endemic to the Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi River valleys in the United States. Internationally, the fungus is predominantly found in river valleys in North and Central America, eastern and southern Europe, and parts of Africa, eastern Asia, and Australia.""The soil in areas endemic for histoplasmosis provides an acidic damp environment with high organic content that is good for mycelial growth. Highly infectious soil is found near areas inhabited by bats and birds. Birds cannot be infected by the fungus and do not transmit the disease; however, bird excretions contaminate the soil, thereby enriching the growth medium for the mycelium. In contrast, bats can become infected, and they transmit histoplasmosis through droppings. Contaminated soil can be potentially infectious for years. Outbreaks of histoplasmosis have been associated with construction and renovation activities that disrupt contaminated soil. In addition, travelers to endemic areas are at risk for histoplasmosis because airborne spores can travel hundreds of feet.""Most individuals with histoplasmosis are asymptomatic. Those who develop clinical manifestations are usually immunocompromised or are exposed to a high quantity of inoculum. _Histoplasma_ species may remain latent in healed granulomas and recur, if there is impairment of cell-mediated immunity.""Approximately 90 per cent of patients are asymptomatic. If symptoms develop, onset occurs 3-14 days after exposure. Fever, headache, malaise, myalgia, abdominal pain, and chills are common symptoms; usually, histoplasmosis is self-limited. Individuals exposed to a large inoculum may develop severe dyspnea resulting from diffuse pulmonary involvement. Joint pain and skin lesions occur in 5-6 per cent of patients, mostly in females. Enlarged hilar [the hilum is part of a gland or organ through which ducts, nerves, or blood vessels enter and leave] and mediastinal lymph nodes are present in 5-10 per cent of patients. Cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and/or chest pain may be present and are related to the degree of compression on the pulmonary airway and circulation. Paratracheal involvement may cause cough or dyspnea because of compression on the trachea or bronchi."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1556>.]
