The New Arab [in Arabic, trans. Mod.NS, edited]<http://bit.ly/2s356PR>A total of 5 new cases of poliomyelitis have been reported in the Deir al-Zour countryside in eastern Syria, amid fears that the disease could become epidemic due to the poor health conditions in the region and the areas controlled by the Islamic State (ISIS) and the Syrian government forces.Sources reported to The New Arab that doctors in the eastern countryside of Deir al-Zour had clinically diagnosed 5 new cases of poliomyelitis, one in Diblan town, 2 in Subikhan town and 2 in Gharibah town.The sources explained that the recorded cases are all based on the clinical symptoms, and the disease is likely to become epidemic if the health situation continues as it is in the region, as the disease is communicable.The areas mentioned above witness a complete absence of the health organizations and UN agencies responsible for fighting poliomyelitis and vaccine distribution, primarily the World Health Organization.[Byline: Jalal Bakour]--Communicated by:ProMED-MENA<promed-mena@promedmail.org>[Poliomyelitis is a crippling and potentially deadly infectious disease, which is caused by the poliovirus.Earlier in May 2017, tens of cases of suspected poliomyelitis were reported from Deir al-Zour in Syria (Poliomyelitis - Syria: (Deir al Zour) susp, RFI 20170506.5018204). Later, 3 cases were confirmed to be due to infection with the circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses type 2 (Poliomyelitis - Syria (02): (Deir al Zour) conf. cVDPV 20170609.5094651). - Mod.NS][We await further information on this apparent ongoing outbreak of poliomyelitis associated with a circulating vaccine derived poliovirus (cVDPV). A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9043>.A map of Syria showing provinces/govenorates can be found at: <http://www.nationsonline.org/maps/syria-map.jpg>. - Mod.MPP]******[2] Syria - WHO update 13 Jun 2017 cVDPVDate: Tue 13 Jun 2017Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/13-June-2017-polio-syrian-arab-republic/en/>Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 - Syrian Arab Republic--------------------------------------------------------------------A circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreak has been confirmed in the Deir Al Zour Governorate of the Syrian Arab Republic. There is evidence of genetic linkage among 3 isolates of type-2 vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPV2) isolated in the stool specimens of 2 acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases with dates of onset of paralysis on [5 Mar and 6 May 2017], and the contact specimen of an AFP case collected on [17 Apr 2017]. Al Mayadeen was also the epi-centre of the wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) outbreak in Syrian Arab Republic in 2013. Aggressive multi-country polio outbreak response effectively controlled the WPV1 outbreak and no WPV1 case has been reported in Syrian Arab Republic since [21 Jan 2014].Public health responseSince the confirmation of the 1st VDPV2 during May 2017, AFP surveillance has been intensified in the Governorate, especially in the Al Mayadeen district. As of 6 June 2017, a total of 58 AFP cases have been reported from the Governorate this year [2017]. In addition to the 2 cases that have tested positive for VDPV2, a further 11 have tested negative for polioviruses, with the remaining samples being under process in the laboratories or being transported to the laboratories.Subsequent to the confirmation of the cVDPV2 outbreak, outbreak response planning is underway, including planning for supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) with monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2), in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols.Although access for vaccination is compromised due to prevailing insecurity in Deir Al Zour, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using bivalent oral polio vaccine (bOPV). The most recent full trivalent oral polio vaccine (tOPV) round was conducted in October 2015; while tOPV rounds conducted in the 1st 4 months of 2016 only reached part of the target population of the Deir Al Zour Governorate. It is pertinent to mention that Syrian Arab Republic introduced 2 doses of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) in the routine infant immunization schedule in 2008. Syrian Arab Republic switched from tOPV to bOPV for routine immunization on 1 May 2016.A detailed risk analysis is currently being updated, including assessing overall population immunity levels and strengthening active searches for additional cases of AFP. Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighboring countries as well.WHO risk assessmentThe detection of cVDPV2 underscores the importance of maintaining high levels of routine vaccination coverage at all levels to minimize the risk and consequences of any poliovirus circulation. Such events also underscore the risk in areas or regions with continued substantial insecurity that hampers maintaining high population immunity through routine vaccination. A robust outbreak response is needed to rapidly stop the VDPV2 transmission. WHO will continue to evaluate the epidemiological situation and outbreak response measures being implemented.WHO adviceIt is important to complete the ongoing risk assessment as soon as possible to inform the vaccination response with mOPV2 and IPV. The geographical scale of the vaccination response will be in accordance with the findings of the risk assessment. It will be critical to achieve the highest possible coverage during the vaccination response. Given the difficult and challenging security situation in the area, appropriate strategies will be identified and utilized to implement the response. Intensified AFP surveillance should continue.It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories, and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO's International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within 4 weeks to 12 months prior to the travel.As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), efforts to limit the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency and consider vaccination of all international travellers.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp******[3] Democratic Republic of Congo - WHO update 13 Jun 2017, cVDPVDate: Tue 13 Jun 2017Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/13-June-2017-polio-drc/en/>Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 - Democratic Republic of the Congo ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------In the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), 2 separate circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2s (cVDPV2s) have been confirmed. The 1st cVDPV2 strain has been isolated from 2 acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases from 2 districts in Haut-Lomami province, with onset of paralysis on [20 Feb and 8 Mar 2017]. The 2nd cVDPV2 strain has been isolated from Maniema province, from 2 AFP cases (with onset of paralysis on [18 Apr and 8 May 2017]) and a healthy contact in the community.Public health responseThe Ministry of Health, supported by WHO and partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), has completed a risk assessment, including evaluating population immunity and the risk of further spread.Outbreak response plans are currently being finalized, consisting of strengthening surveillance, including active case searching for additional cases of AFP, and supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) with monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2), in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols.Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighboring countries.WHO risk assessmentWHO assesses the risk of further national spread of these strains to be high, and the risk of international spread to be medium.The detection of cVDPV2s underscores the importance of maintaining high routine vaccination coverage everywhere, to minimize the risk and consequences of any poliovirus circulation. These events also underscore the risk posed by any low-level transmission of the virus. A robust outbreak response as initiated is needed to rapidly stop circulation and ensure sufficient vaccination coverage in the affected areas to prevent similar outbreaks in the future. WHO will continue to evaluate the epidemiological situation and outbreak response measures being implemented.WHO adviceIt is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.WHO's International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) within 4 weeks to 12 months of travel. As per the advice of the Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), efforts to limit the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency and consider vaccination of all international travellers.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp[The WHO updates released today [Tue 13 Jun 2017] contain the same information as carried on the Global Polio Eradication Initiative website and posted previously (see Poliomyelitis update (09): Syria (DY), conf. cVDPV 20170608.5093275 and Poliomyelitis update (08): global (Congo DR cVDPV) 20170526.5064449). I have chosen to repeat these as a reminder that while WPV1 has been identified only in Pakistan and Afghanistan during 2017, the presence of cVDPV2 in 2 geographically separated countries - Syria in the Middle East, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Central Africa is a reminder that the polio eradication effort is having setbacks related to reversion of the type 2 attenuated vaccine virus contained in the oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) to a more neurovirulent virus that can produce paralytic disease. In both countries, the outbreaks are occurring in areas with suboptimal vaccination coverages. In Syria, the area involved is an area with prolonged civil unrest, in a governorate that borders with Iraq. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the provinces involved are adjoining, and are located in the southeastern section of the country, with Haut-Lomamo having been a former district of Katanga province, gaining provincial status in 2015.In the media report above, there is mention of 5 newly identified AFP (acute flaccid paralysis) cases in Deir Al Zour, Syria that are pending laboratory confirmation. As the WHO report mentions, of the 58 previously reported AFP cases, only 14 have had laboratory analyses with 3 identifying cVDPV2 isolates, 11 not identifying any poliovirus, and the remaining 41 cases still pending laboratory analyses. Presumably the 5 cases mentioned in the media report in section [1] are in addition to the 58 cases mentioned in the WHO report.We await further laboratory results, and updates.The HealthMap/ProMED maps can be found at:Syria: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/86>DR Congo: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/194> and a map showing the proposed new provinces of the Congo DR can be found at: <https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2015/06/04/the-democratic-republic-of-congo-might-break-up-its-provinces-then-what/?utm_term=.b3bb26bac26f>. - Mod.MPPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/86>.]
