WABC-TV, Eyewitness News [edited]<http://abc7ny.com/news/heroic-efforts-may-have-saved-lives-in-co-scare-/2092334/>More than 30 people suffered minor injuries following a carbon monoxide [CO] scare at an apartment building in TriBeCa in Lower Manhattan [New York], fire officials said, and the store manager saved lives by acting quickly to rescue others.[The manager at] the Amish Market on Murray Street where the drama unfolded, said it began as the workers were getting ready for the day.""I had 25 people down in my prep area,"" he said. ""One fainted. I went down to see why she fainted. By the time I got to the bottom of the steps, my other manager, who was tending to that lady, also fainted. At that split second, somebody else fainted right behind me, and I knew it was carbon monoxide.""[The manager] is 65 and has leukemia, but he rushed to carry 6 unconscious victims from the basement upstairs.Firefighters responded to the scene around 8:30 Tuesday morning [13 Jun 2017] and immediately began evacuating and treating people.""We found a defective boiler in the basement with some sort of broken pipe that was producing the CO,"" Chief of Department James Leonard said.The situation was made more tense when people started feeling faint just as a worker opened a package in the basement, stirring worries that the parcel might have been poisonous.NYPD [New York City Police Department], the bomb squad, and FBI investigators were called to the scene, but the box was deemed to be harmless. It turned out to be a salad bowl box delivered on [Mon 12 Jun 2017].High carbon monoxide readings were detected throughout the 12-story building. The meters measure up to 1000 parts per million, enough to ""render you unconscious very, very quickly,"" Leonard said.The normal level of carbon monoxide in a house can be from under zero to 15 ppm, depending on whether there's a gas stove, according to the US Environmental Protection Agency.The 32 injured people were being treated at area hospitals, but officials said the injuries were all relatively minor. ""Some had passed out, but all of the injuries were consistent with high levels of CO,"" Leonard said.The broken pipe was capped and CO levels decreased by 10:30 a.m. The situation was then declared under control.The basement of the building did not have any carbon monoxide detectors, but also was not required to have any. ""We don't need carbon monoxide detectors,"" Jording said. ""We don't have any gas. We have no need. We have people who come and tell us there was no need to have any carbon monoxide detectors.""The city's buildings department told Eyewitness News reporter Tim Fleischer that CO detectors are not required in commercial stores or in basements, and they were not required here.According to the store owner, there have been complaints about the building's boiler. ""The boiler of the building has a complete crack in it,"" Pat (last name not provided) said. ""Our kitchen is next to that boiler, and that seems to be a problem.""Department of Buildings inspectors were on the scene investigating on [Tue 13 Jun 2017] and ordered the building owners to shut down the boiler until further notice.[Byline: Tim Fleischer]--Communicated by:Denis Green<legion@q-net.net.au>[ProMED-mail thanks Denis Green for his submission.Carbon monoxide is a deadly odorless, colorless gas. This article even notes people were collapsing without any apparent reason. Carbon monoxide is most often the fumes from burning fuel in some type of engine, a car, a small engine, a gas furnace, or as in this case, a boiler. This article points out that CO, carbon monoxide, can build up particularly indoors and be the source of a poisoning of multiple people. Levels in the building were many times what they should have been.In lower doses a person may experience headaches or dizziness or faint. But in other instances the high level can overcome a person with little or no warning. Furthermore, those with heart disease or lung disease may be at more risk of collapsing.Generally, if provided fresh breathing air in a timely manner, the affected individual can recover. However, it doesn't take a long time of breathing high levels of CO to result in death. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/61125>.]
