Correodelcaroni.com [in Spanish, trans. KS, edited]<http://www.correodelcaroni.com/index.php/mas/salud/item/56645-brote-de-paludismo-mata-a-tres-personas-en-zona-rural-de-ciudad-guayana>The malaria outbreak has killed 3 people in the rural region of Ciudad Guayana, Bolivar state.Malaria continues to advance in the Ciudad Guayana area at never before seen levels. While 2 years ago in Caroni there were just over 100 cases, the Guayana mayor said in a press release on 5 Jun 2017 that malaria currently ""affects more than 50 percent of the population of Guayana.""The most affected parish of Ciudad Guayana is Pozo Verde. On Tuesday [6 Jun 2017], residents protested at the outpatient clinic to warn that 3 people have already died from the malaria epidemic due to the shortage of antimalarial drugs and drugs in general in this rural area, located on the road to El Pao.The protest began because today [8 Jun 2017], an elderly man died inside the outpatient clinic of Pozo Verde, ""and the family told us it was due to malaria. The problem with malaria there is serious,"" confirmed Antonio AgrimÌ n, a spokesman for Pozo Verde's Circle of Popular Struggle (CLP) number 3.The activist has followed the progress of malaria in the parish as he participates in neighborhood efforts to equip the Pozo Verde clinic with more supplies. ""I know that yesterday (7 Jun 2017) they received a large lot of drugs (anti malaria), but they were used up by this morning. The problem is widespread; many people are sick.""The death of the elderly man this morning [8 Jun 2017] comes on top of the deaths of a young girl and an adult woman over the weekend, according to Joel Freites, another activist in the area. ""We are talking about 3 dead this week alone. We know that there are more so far this year [2017], but I do not have the names at hand,"" said the spokesman.AgrimÌ n added that some 700 malaria tests are processed daily in the Pozo Verde outpatient clinic ""and 90 percent of them are positive."" This Tuesday [13 Jun 2017?] at 3:00 p.m. they expect to receive another batch of anti-malarial medicine, which must be taken daily for 15 continuous days. If a day is missed, the treatment loses effectiveness.According to the Epidemiological Bulletin of the Ministry of Health, malaria increased by 76.4 percent throughout the country between 2015 and 2016, for a total of 240 613 malaria sufferers in Venezuela. Of the total, 177 619 of the infected are located in the state of BolÌ var.""Malaria is a tragedy that is being lived in Pozo Verde. It has to do with people who are going to the mines to look for opportunities. There has been a problem for some time, but now a rebound has emerged like never before,"" Freites said.Malaria is a disease transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito, which typically reproduces in jungle ecosystems. The municipality of Sifontes, south of Bolivar, has always been the national leader in the number of malaria infections. By the end of 2016, they had reported 102 543 confirmed cases, according to the Epidemiological Bulletin of the Ministry of Health.The lack of public health systems has resulted in mine workers becoming infected with malaria then carrying the sickness to the municipality of CaronÌ , where the disease has rapidly spread.According to the Epidemiological Bulletin, the municipality of Caroni reported 8138 cases of malaria in 2016, a massive increase from 2015, when they only reported 922.The parish with the highest number of cases is Pozo Verde, which at the end of 2016 had 6412 malaria infections. The Ministry of Health has not updated the figures of the Epidemiological Bulletin for June 2017, but the residents of the sector confirm that ""every day there are more cases.""Freites clarified that ""there are people who say that they have had malaria several times, but that is not so; it is the same parasite that has not been exterminated; they have not really recovered; ...that is because there is no medicine.""The respondents said that at the Pozo Verde outpatient clinic, IV fluids and equipment necessary to help the dehydrated patients are scarce.""There are people who are healthy and can resist the disease, but hypertensive, obese, diabetic, or pregnant people are at risk if they get malaria,"" said Freites, referring to risky -- potentially deadly -- cases.It is worth mentioning that a year ago, residents of Puerto Libre in the Cachamay parish also protested after the deaths of 3 people in the community suffering from malaria, and to demand the government fumigate in their sector.On 5 Jun 2017, the Social Development Department of the CaronÌ  City Council donated 3 microscopes to carry out malaria tests for patients in Pozo Verde, 5 de Julio and Yocoima, the ""parishes with the highest number of people affected"" by malaria in CaronÌ , according to this institution.It was in this communication that the municipality revealed that more than 50 percent of the population of Ciudad Guayana is affected by malaria.Correo del CaronÌ  has been able to confirm the rapid advance of the disease in the city between 2016 and 2017, including the parish Vista al Sol, a town that until 2 years ago had not reported any cases.""We are going to make an extensive investigation of inhabitants of the municipality of CaronÌ  with the purpose of attacking malaria from the root and thus proceed to the delivery of medicines and fumigation in each community of Ciudad Guayana,"" said the press release by the political secretary of the Mayor's Office, Roy Quiaragua.The official said that ""in the coming weeks"" the Social Patriotic Services Corporation will clean up stagnant water in rural parishes ""to strengthen the fight against malaria.""The actions of the municipality do not include days of fumigation or distribution of mosquito nets with insecticides, measures that are essential to eradicate malaria according to the World Health Organization (WHO).Currently, malaria is a disease eradicated from the 1st world. Venezuela has been experiencing an unprecedented upswing in the last year, which shows the ineffectiveness of epidemiological control in the local and national public health system.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED has been reporting on the evolving return of malaria to Venezuela over the past few years. A recent map from the CDC (Atlanta) indicates that risk of malaria exists in the whole country, and all visitors are advised to take malaria prophylaxis (<https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2018/infectious-diseases-related-to-travel/yellow-fever-malaria-information-by-country/venezuela#5337>). - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/55916>.]
