Financial Tribune (Iran) [edited]<https://financialtribune.com/articles/economy-business-and-markets/66615/red-meat-market-in-slump-over-congo-fever-outbreak>The spread of the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever [CCHF] in Iran has caused serious concern among Iranians, as many refrain from buying red meat.""After the spread of the disease, people refuse to buy red meat, which has led to a slump in sheepmeat sales,"" chairman of Sheepmeat Union, Ali Asghar Maleki, was quoted as saying by Mehr News Agency. Following the decline in demand, sheepmeat prices have fallen by 20 000 rials (USD 0.5) per kilogram, he added. Maleki warned of more disruption in the market, if the trend continues.CCHF is a widespread tick-borne viral disease that is now endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East, and Asia. Symptoms include fever, muscle pain, dizziness, neck pain and stiffness, backache, headache, sore eyes, and photophobia.It is a zoonotic disease carried by several domestic and wild animals. While clinical disease is rare in infected animals, it is severe in infected humans, with a mortality rate of 10-40 percent. Outbreaks of illness are usually attributed to _Hyalomma_ tick bites and contact with infected animals or people.So far, 38 cases of infection with the disease have been confirmed in Iran, 3 of whom have lost their lives.The head of Tehran Organ Meat Sellers Union told [Iranian Labour News Agency] that the spread of the disease and talks surrounding it have caused many problems for the members of this union with sales having slumped badly.""Despite the Health Minister's announcement that the disease is under control, people still refuse to buy or consume (sheep or cow) liver,"" Gholamhossein Shirazi said.Organ meat, such as sheep or cow liver, heart and kidney, is a popular food in Iran. Noting that people's fear about consuming liver in authorized member unions is unfounded, he said all raw materials are provided from authorized slaughterhouses in the suburbs of Tehran, which operate under the supervision of Iran's Veterinarian Organization.""With 15 big industrial slaughterhouses in the capital city, there is no need for contraband meat,"" he added.Shirazi stressed the role of media in dispelling rumors and said, ""It's the duty of mass media to report the officials' announcements to put people's mind at ease.""Health Minister Hassan Qazizadeh Hashemi on [11 Jun 2017] announced that Congo fever in Iran is fully under control.However, he advised consumers to buy meat from authorized centers only.In addition, Mohammad Mehdi Gouya, the head of the Infectious Diseases Office at the Health Ministry, has urged people to check the Iranian Veterinary Organization's seal of approval on meat products before making purchases and to keep them refrigerated for 24 hours before consumption. People working in slaughterhouses are advised to use masks, gloves, and boots, as a precautionary measure, IRNA reported.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Maps of Iran can be seen at <http://www.mapsofworld.com/iran/maps/iran-political-map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/128>.Recently, the incidence of CCHF has increased rapidly in the countries of the World Health Organization Eastern Mediterranean Region (WHO EMRO), with sporadic human cases and outbreaks being reported from a number of countries in the region. However, very little reliable and accurate data are currently available on the burden of the disease in the region, as different surveillance systems for CCHF are used in many countries. Most countries do not have a definitive preventive and control strategy for CCHF as many aspects of the disease, such as the maintenance and transmission of the virus and the pathogenesis of the disease in humans, remain poorly understood.Since 1999, CCHF has been reported in 26 of the 31 provinces of Iran, with the greatest numbers of cases in Sistan and Baluchestan, Isfahan, Fars, Tehran, Khorasan, and Khuzestan. After the establishment of a comprehensive CCHF surveillance programme for humans and animals in Iran, a total of 3817 suspected human infections were reported between 2000 and 2015, of these 1068 were laboratory-confirmed with a case fatality rate was 14 percent. Sistan and Baluchestan province, which borders Afghanistan and Pakistan, have reported the highest infection rate in the country [2]. The detection of IgG in livestock indicated that that 35.8 percent of over 5000 sera were positive for CCHFV IgG. Therefore, the disease and its transmission elements are endemic to the country and the contribution of cross-border movements of people and cattle would be only a fraction as compared to the prevalent risk factors.It is important that continued efforts be made to improve the understanding of practices that may promote disease transmission and appropriate preventive and control measures recommended for the high risk groups.References----------1. Papa A, Weber F, Hewson R, et al. Meeting report: First International Conference on Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever. Antiviral Res 2015; 120: 57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.05.005; abstract available at <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26022198>.2. Mostafavi E, Haghdoost A, Khakifirouz S, Chinikar S. Spatial analysis of Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever in Iran. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2013; 89(6): 1135-41. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.12-0509; available at <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3854891/>- Mod.UBA]
