Wilkes Journal-Patriot [edited]<http://www.journalpatriot.com/opinion/hepatitis-surge/article_65c5b922-51ff-11e7-83e1-4385f1ba8c2c.html>North Carolina is in the midst of a rapid rise in cases of hepatitis B and C, prompting state health officials to urge residents to get tested. According to the NC Department of Health and Human Services, new cases of hepatitis B were up by 56 percent between 2014 and 2016, and new cases of hepatitis C increased by 69 percent in the same period. Hepatitis C has been on the rise in the state since 2009. The spread is mostly resulting from exposure to infected blood when drug users share needles or other drug paraphernalia.There is a strong correlation between the opioid epidemic and the surge in new cases of hepatitis B and C. Prescription pain pills are often liquefied with heat and then injected with a needle. State health officials are encouraging North Carolinians to help stop the spread of hepatitis B and hepatitis C by not sharing needles or other injection equipment and by talking to their physician or local health department about getting tested. Hepatitis B, and less often hepatitis C, can also be spread through sex with an infected partner.Most hepatitis cases in North Carolina have been in white males ages 21 to 40, with western border counties like Wilkes impacted the most. Adults born between 1945 and 1965 are also more likely to have hepatitis C. Preliminary data shows 172 new cases of hepatitis B and 186 new cases of hepatitis C were reported in North Carolina in 2016. In 2014, there were 110 new cases each of type B and type C reported. The CDC estimates the actual number of infections is likely 7 times higher than the number of reported cases of hepatitis B and 14 times higher for hepatitis C.An estimated 110 000 to 150 000 North Carolinians have a chronic hepatitis C infection, and 25 000 to 66 000 have a chronic hepatitis B infection. Many people do not experience symptoms and are unaware they are infected.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Hepatitis B can be prevented by a vaccine that has been available in the USA since 1982 and has been part of universal immunization in childhood for most of that time. It would be interesting to know the age range and immunization history of the acute HBV cases.Most cases of acute hepatitis C are not recognized or reported because they are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice) so the case numbers are likely underreported. In the absence of a vaccine for hepatitis C (as are available for hepatitis A and B), infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/235>.]
