Kurdistan24 [edited]<http://www.kurdistan24.net/en/news/7292e6d2-5062-4f2d-83fa-1cb832312d9c>The period between when the food was cooked and then transported to the IDP camps resulted in the food poisoning of over 825 displaced persons from Mosul in southwestern Erbil.On [Mon 12 Jun 2017], a group of volunteers prepared the food in Erbil and then transferred it to the camp in the afternoon as part of a charitable initiative. Hundreds of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in the Hassan Sham and U2 camp got food poisoning after consuming the meals. They were immediately transferred to hospitals in Erbil and received necessary treatment.""After we carried out an investigation of the case, we found out the cause of the food poisoning was due to the long period between preparing and consuming the food as it was packed in plastic containers and transferred to the camps,"" Erbil Governor Nawzad Hadi said on [Mon 19 Jun 2017], in a press conference. ""There were no deliberate intentions to poison IDPs by those who cooked the food,"" he added.""The food itself was okay, but the delay between the preparation of the meals and their distribution, along with the improper storing of the food, was the reason hundreds of IDPs became ill,"" Hadi emphasized, stating the case had been sent to court.The Governor previously mentioned the food was cooked at 9:00 a.m. then transferred to the camp at 1:00 p.m. The food was later distributed between 4:00 and 5:00 p.m.Hadi noted the food should be prepared at the camps and that premade meals are forbidden. He thanked the Peshmerga and security members for quickly transporting 638 IDPs to hospitals in Erbil to receive prompt medical treatment, while the remaining were treated at the camps.The Erbil Health Department's Director-General Saman Hussein Barzinjy told Kurdistan24 the group which delivered the donation did not take into consideration health hazards related to food preparation and distribution. At the time, Barzinjy mentioned 1 of the camp's inhabitants had died from food poisoning. However, a statement released later apologized for the misinformation, assuring no one had died, adding the condition of the child who was thought dead was ""stable"".The Kurdistan Region is home to almost 2 million IDPs and refugees who fled from the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.[Byline: Mewan Dolamari and Karzan Sulaivany]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The issue seems clearly to be related to lack of refrigeration but the etiology remains unstated and may well be staphylococcal enterotoxin. - Mod.LL][Food must never be left in the temperature danger zone from 40F (4C) to 140F (60C) for extended periods of time. Hot food needs to be cooled to 40F (4C) within 2 hours or kept above 140F (60C). Cold food should be maintained below 40F (4C). Failure to follow the guidelines for hot or cold foods can lead to food poisoning. -Mod.JHA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/11962>.]
