ABC News [edited]<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-06-21/australian-man-dies-after-returning-from-thailand/8639620>An Australian man returned from Thailand has died from the rare but potentially fatal mosquito-borne disease, Japanese encephalitis.The Victorian man in his 60s had visited Phuket for 10 days in early May [2017] and became lethargic on day 8. After returning home, he struggled to stay awake and went to hospital a few days later in a confused state. His conscious state continued to diminish, and he was eventually admitted to the intensive care unit, where he died.Japanese encephalitis causes a brain infection that is fatal in about 20 to 30 percent of cases. But not all mosquitoes carry the virus, and the risk of catching it is ""vanishingly rare,"" according to Steven Tong, who treated the man at Royal Melbourne Hospital.""We don't have Japanese encephalitis within Australia itself, so it has to be acquired during travel to areas of risk,"" he said. ""That depends on going to those areas and being exposed to mosquitos carrying the virus, being bitten by an infected mosquito, and then developing the disease. Most figures suggest that for travellers to endemic areas such as Thailand, the risk is probably in the order of one in a million to one in 500 000 travellers to those areas will get Japanese encephalitis. Unfortunately, this guy was just very, very unlucky.""Doctors said the man had not been vaccinated and had not sought any pre-travel advice about the virus. Despite the virus' potentially fatal nature, Dr Tong said there was no risk the man's illness could endanger other Australians, because Japanese encephalitis [virus] breeds in aquatic birds not found in Australia, or pigs, before they can infect humans. ""People have such a short-lived duration of the virus in them that people are seen as a dead-end host,"" Dr Tong said.It is unclear how the man caught the disease. There were no reports he had contact with animals or travelled to rural regions in Thailand, but he reported multiple mosquito bites while in Thailand.The last known case of Japanese encephalitis in Australia was in 2015 when another Victorian man, aged 45, returned with the disease after a trip to Bali.Dr Tong said despite the rare nature of Japanese encephalitis, Australians travelling anywhere in Southeast Asia should take precautions, including vaccination and the use of insect repellent. ""Obviously, it's a devastating disease, so any prevention is helpful,"" he said.[Byline: Anne Barker]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This is the same case posted on 3 Jun 2017. At that time, the patient was alive but on ventilatory support, obeyed commands at times, and had a flaccid paralysis. Subsequent to that report, the man died.As noted in that earlier report, Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus is endemic in Thailand, so the occurrence of this case, although unusual, is not surprising. The specific location where the patient acquired his JE virus infection in Thailand was Phuket, a very popular tourist destination. Visitors to rural areas in Thailand are well advised to take the precautions recommended by the US CDC (<https://www.cdc.gov/japaneseencephalitis/prevention/index.html>).Traveling to a tourist destination such as Phuket poses a dilemma for the tourist: to be vaccinated or not? The probability of acquiring a JE virus infection during a short-term visit is very low but not zero. The vaccine can be relatively expensive. JE vaccine is recommended for travelers who plan to spend one month or more in endemic areas during the JE virus transmission season. This includes long-term travelers, recurrent travelers, or expatriates who will be based in urban areas but are likely to visit endemic rural or agricultural areas during a high-risk period of JE virus transmission. Travelers should consult their travel clinics and at least be advised of measures to avoid mosquito bites. Apparently, this individual did not do that.Readers interested in clinical details of this case, provided in the previous post by Drs David Hamer and Karin Leder as well as Dr Shio Yen Tio, Dr Khai Lin Huang and Associate Professor Steven Tong, can see them at the archived report listed below. - Mod.TY.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/151>.]
