Pune Mirror [edited]<http://punemirror.indiatimes.com/pune/others/one-japanese-encephalitis-case-gets-state-on-its-toes/articleshow/59260060.cms>On [Sat 10 Jun 2017], a couple from Kondhwa rushed their 10-month-old infant to a hospital after vomiting bouts, constant cough and noticeable abnormal behaviour. Suspecting that the kid might have contracted Japanese encephalitis (JE) -- an infection that corrodes brain cells -- the doctors sent his blood samples to the National Institute of Virology (NIV), which confirmed their suspicion.The diagnosis, a 1st in the city and 2nd in the state [this year, 2017], has got government officials on their toes. The state epidemiology cell and Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) epidemiology cell have been keeping a close watch on the situation to ensure that it does not go out of control.Inamdar Multispecialty Hospital in Kondhwa communicated the diagnosis to the civic officials after the 10-month-old infant's week-long struggle in the intensive care unit. After NIV's confirmation, the doctors conveyed results that showed severe inflammation of the brain caused by Japanese encephalitis virus that is transmitted by the bite of infected _Culex vishnui_ [group] mosquitoes. The baby is currently stable and out of danger. He has been shifted to the general ward.Officials at the PMC's health department claim that the infant contracted the disease when he and his family were in Vile Parle, Mumbai, 2 weeks earlier.Mukund Diggikar, joint director of malaria, filaria, water-borne and vector-borne diseases at the health department, said, ""Ever since the blood samples turned out to be positive, we have issued orders among officials to immediately survey the area. The need of the hour is to avoid further outbreaks.""He added that the district malaria officer along with the state epidemiology and PMC epidemiology cell have been asked to visit the areas along with insect collectors. ""We are on high alert as this is the 1st case of JE in Pune and 2nd in the state. The 1st case in the state was reported in Raigad,"" Diggikar said.PMC epidemiology cell chief, Dr Kalpana Baliwant, said that they quickly got into action after the orders. They visited Kondhwa for a survey and to eradicate _Culex vishnui_ breeding spots. However, they found none. ""We even checked houses and societies for breeding spots. This survey will continue for a couple of days,"" she said.With the intensive survey in motion, Dr Vikram Padbidri, infectious disease expert at Jehangir Hospital, Pune told Pune Mirror of the measures one can take on a personal level to avoid JE, cases of which are diagnosed mostly during [the] monsoon.""JE commonly affects children. Most of the cases tend to be asymptomatic. Some might suffer from mild symptoms like fever and headache. About 1 in 250 cases may land up with severe manifestations like high fever, headache, neck stiffness, disorientation, coma, seizures and paralysis which could ultimately result in death,"" he said.Padbidri added that JE can be prevented by simply avoiding mosquito bites, use of repellents, mosquito nets and eliminating breeding places of the mosquito. ""Nowadays JE vaccine is also available in the market,"" he said.In 2015, 7 JE cases were diagnosed in the state. In the following year, the number spiked to 12.[Byline: Vicky Pathare]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[There were 2 JE cases confirmed in the city in December 2016 (see Japanese encephalitis & other - India (39): (MA) 20161223.4720235). Although avoidance of mosquito bites as recommended above is prudent, vaccination is the best protective measure. JE cases are relatively uncommon in this area, and in addition to a very young age, may account for the infant not having been vaccinated. The virus is endemic in north western India with birds as reservoir hosts and pigs as amplifiers. The _Culex_ mosquito vectors can become very abundant seasonally, breeding in wetlands. Vector control is difficult. - Mod. TYMaps of India can be accessed at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm>.]
