The News [edited]<https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/212140-22-of-66-new-Chikungunya-cases-reported-in-District-Malir>At least 66 new cases of the Chikungunya viral fever have been detected in Karachi within a span of 6 days, with 22 of them being reported in District Malir, as per a report released by the Sindh Health Department on [Wed 21 Jun 2017].According to the report, 66 more cases of the vector-borne ailment of Chikungunya surfaced from June 12 to 17 [2017] in Karachi, taking the patients toll to 3190 in the metropolitan this year [2017]. It said 22 cases were reported from Malir, 2 from District East and 42 from District West.Out of the 298 samples tested for disease diagnosis at the National Institute of Health Islamabad, 246 were found positive for Chikungunya, the report added. Chikungunya is a mosquito-borne, non-lethal viral disease caused by a species of mosquitoes called _Aedes aegypti_, which also carry the dengue and zika viruses. According to experts, the chikungunya virus causes fever and severe joint pain, while other symptoms include muscle pain, headache, nausea, fatigue and rashes.A 9-member delegation of the World Health Organization also visited Karachi in May this year [2017] to help health authorities prevent the Chikungunya disease from spreading in the metropolis.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Based on the recent report from the Regional Disease Surveillance and Response Unit (RDSRU), from 19 Dec 2016 to 11 June 2017, 3514 suspected cases of chikungunya were identified and registered, using the following WHO recommended case definition in the different towns of Karachi: ""A person with acute onset of fever (102 deg F/39 deg C) and severe arthralgia or arthritis not explained by other medical conditions, and who resides or has visited epidemic or endemic areas within 2 weeks before the onset of symptoms.""According to the available data (up to 16 Apr 2017), cases continue to be reported. Total 298 samples were taken and sent to National Institute of Health (NIH), Islamabad for Laboratory confirmation of diagnosis. Out of these, 246 samples were found positive for chikungunya virus on RT-PCR.The total suspected case numbers mentioned in the news report above are lower than the figures shared by RDSRU Sindh.The following actions are being taken by the health department in Sindh;1. Division level coordination meetings have been conducted in Karachi in order to develop an action plan using integrated approach2. All District and Town Health officers have been instructed to take measures for prevention and treatment of Chikungunya fever.3. Information, Education and Communication activities: - Pamphlets containing information about the disease printed in local languages and distributed to all the Hospitals and Primary Health Centers in the areas. - Posters and advertisements in local languages were also issued4. Capacity building of District Health Officers and focal person is being carried out with the support of RDSRU of FELTP Pakistan5. Indoor insecticide Residual Spraying and fumigation conducted in high risk areas.6. Anti-larval measures carried out.ProMED-mail thanks Dr Muhammad Asif Syed, Provincial Technical Officer the Regional Disease Surveillance and Response Unit, Karachi, Sindh, for the information above on the chikungunya outbreak. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/947>.]
