Ultimas noticias [in Spanish, trans. KS, edited]<http://www.ultimasnoticias.com.ve/noticias/comunidad/aumentan-casos-picadas-viuda-negra/>The introduction of invasive black widow spiders into Venezuela continues to claim lives. This species, which is not native to South America, has spread in the Andean and western regions of the country over the past few years.In Zulia, one of the states with the highest incidence of bites of _Latrodectus mactans_, 7 cases have been recorded, including 2 deaths, between March and May [2017 presumably. - Mod.TG].Although it is not known exactly how this species arrived in the country, it is presumed that it was introduced from Panama, through Colombia.According to official reports, black widow sightings and bites have been reported in Falcon, Lara, Yaracuy, Trujillo and Tachira.First Lieutenant Luis Contreras, of the Marine Firemen of the National Institute of Aquatic Spaces (Inea), explained that the bite of this arachnid is lethal to humans, and its toxin can even kill a horse.""Between March and May of this year [2017], 7 cases of poisoning from black widow spider bites have been reported, especially in the Sur del Lago de Maracaibo and Sierra de Perija areas,"" he said.One of the victims is MV, 21, who died on 2 March 2017 at the general hospital of Sur del Maracaibo, where he was transferred after being bitten by a black widow while he cut oil palm in the area of Jesus Maria Semprum.The other is SQ, 17, who was bitten while he was collecting fertilizer in the Pan American sector, also in the Sur del Lago area, but in the state of Merida.Contreras, who is a specialist in snakes and poisonous animals, said that the venom antiserum should be applied within 6 hours of the bite.""In Venezuela, unfortunately, this serum is not produced, because this species is not native to the country. The doses that arrive are imported, some from Costa Rica and others from Mexico. All come via donations, because they are very expensive,"" he said.The official urged citizens to be alert to the presence of these spiders.[Byline: Christopher Gutierrez]--Communicated byKathryn Soderholm<kathryn.soderholm@gmail.com>[Black widow spiders (_Latrodectus mactans_) are found throughout the USA and much of Mexico. One characteristic identifying mark is a red hourglass on the underside of the abdomen of the spider. Also the spider tends to be a very shiny black, almost like wet black paint and they appear very slick.The bite of one of these spiders produces severe pain, generally immediately or within a very few minutes of the bite. This pain can lead to muscle cramping, including of the abdomen and back. A hallmark of this bite is the pain will not subside, even when given anti-inflammatory drugs, including morphine. When pain is intractable in the face of morphine, then it should be immediately noted as a likely black widow bite.There is antivenom (Antivenin _Latrodectus mactans_) that has been proven safe and effective. It is sometimes withheld for fear of reaction to the antivenom. Given the extreme pain the victim experiences, and the few reactions to the antivenom, it would seem prudent to provide the antivenin.Now that Venezuela is aware the spider is in their country, and there have been deaths, it seems to be prudent to secure a source of the antivenom and provide hospitals across the country with it.A close friend of mine was bitten by a black widow. He kept working and by the time he arrived at my house he was in excruciating pain. He was having trouble breathing and had severe cramps. He was hospitalized where a physician could not seem to read that his EKG was perfectly normal. So he gave morphine which had no effect. His wife demanded a neurological consult which quickly determined he had been bitten by a black widow. Because of the emergency room's physician reluctance to treat when morphine did not result in any pain relief, my friend spent several days recovering in the hospital. A timely administration of the antivenom in the emergency room would have left the patient more comfortable and being discharged by morning.Hopefully, Venezuela will have a source of antivenom and get hospitals stocked with this life saving treatment. - Mod.TG][The ongoing healthcare crisis in Venezuela will likely only worsen the threat posed by this recent invader (<http://www.foxnews.com/world/2017/05/24/venezuelas-health-care-crisis-overwhelms-hospitals-in-neighboring-colombia.html>). - Mod.JHA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/38525>.]
