Food Safety News [edited]<http://www.foodsafetynews.com/2017/06/county-wont-name-food-vendor-behind-rifle-rodeo-outbreak/#.WU2m8mjyuUl>Health officials say they're sure food from a specific vendor at the Rifle Rodeo in Garfield County, CO, caused an outbreak that sickened 40 percent of attendees, but they won't name the rodeo organizer or the food vendor, neither of whom obtained required permits and neither of whom will be fined. About 80 of the 200 rodeo attendees reported getting sick with gastrointestinal illnesses after attending the 5 Jun 2017 event, according to a [Wed 21 Jun 2017], update from the Garfield County Public Health Department. Even though the rodeo was at the county fairgrounds, public health was apparently not notified by staff there about the upcoming event with food vendors.Of the victims, about one-4th were children younger than 18, a county spokeswoman said [Thu 22 Jun 2017] afternoon. She said the county had not officially been notified of any victims being hospitalized.""Lab samples sent to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment came back positive for _Clostridium perfringens_, a leading cause of foodborne illness,"" according to the county's online update. ""Case interviews of rodeo attendees linked the source of the illness to food served by an unlicensed vendor at the event.""The executive director of Garfield County Public Health placed the blame for the outbreak on the event organizer, saying the Rifle Rodeo organizer did not obtain required permits. ""... therefore Garfield County Public Health was not aware of or able to inspect food at the event prior to the 5 Jun 2017 outbreak,"" said executive director Yvonne Long in the online statement. ""One thing that we want the public to know is that for public events it is the coordinator's responsibility to find out and comply with the rules, regulations, permits, sales tax requirements and licenses required to host an event.""The specific food vendor implicated in the outbreak has a ""primary location"" that has been inspected, is licensed and is regulated, according to the county health department, but county officials refused [Thu 22 Jun 2017], to name the vendor. ""The county did not name the food vendor because the vendor has been in business for years without violations and public health is using this as an opportunity to work with the vendor to promote healthy practices and prevent further issues,"" the county's spokeswoman said in an email.Improper holding temperatures for food are a primary cause of _Clostridium perfringens_ fodborne illness, according to the CDC and the Garfield County Public Health Department. Similarly, the county will not name the individual who organized the Rifle Rodeo. ""The organization is named 'Rifle Rodeo.' We did not provide the personal name of the organizer because this is a 1st occurrence, and the organizer is working closely with public health to comply with the county,"" the county's spokeswoman said.The health department executive director is quoted by several local media outlets as saying no one will be fined in relation to the outbreak, even though the proper permits were not secured. Standard procedure for the department if a vendor ""fails to pull required permits, has an outbreak, or has areas of improvement noted on a health inspection"" is to deliver written notification and work with the entity on safety regulations, according to the [Wed 21 Jun 2017] update.The county does not have plans to take any specific action or change procedures in an attempt to prevent such situations in the future.Regarding communication between county departments, such as the county fairgrounds staff and public health inspectors, ""the county is ensuring the fairgrounds staff does so,"" according to the county's spokeswoman. ""As noted in the release, event organizers are required to obtain permits and the county will continue to ensure good food safety practices for such temporary events,"" the spokeswoman said.The Denver Post reported some rodeo attendees who got sick said they ate pulled pork at the event. The CDC reports that the majority of _Clostridium perfringens_ outbreaks are associated with undercooked meats and large quantities of food prepared for groups and left unrefrigerated or unheated for too long. If food is kept between 70 degrees and 140 degrees, it is likely to grow _Clostridium perfringens_ bacteria.Food poisoning from _Clostridium perfringens_ is fairly common, but is typically not too severe, and is often mistaken for the 24-hour flu.However, the Type C strain of _Clostridium perfringens_ can cause a more serious condition called Pig-bel Syndrome. This syndrome can cause death of intestinal cells and can often be fatal.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Unlike staphylococcal foodborne illness where the preformed toxin is ingested, in _C. perfringens_ disease, the enterotoxin is formed _in situ_ in the gastrointestinal tract. The following discussion is obtained from the FDA Bad Bug Book <https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/FoodborneIllnessContaminants/UCM297627.pdf>""1. Name of the organism_Clostridium perfringens_ is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming rod. It is widely distributed in the environment and frequently occurs in the intestines of humans and many domestic and feral animals. Spores of the organism persist in soil, sediments, and areas subject to human or animal fecal pollution.2. Nature of acute diseasePerfringens food poisoning is the term used to describe the common foodborne illness caused by _C. perfringens_. A more serious but rare illness is also caused by ingesting food contaminated with type C strains. The latter illness is known as enteritis necroticans or pig-bel disease.3. Nature of diseaseThe common form of perfringens poisoning is characterized by intense abdominal cramps and diarrhea, which begin 8-22 hours after consumption of foods containing large numbers of those _C. perfringens_ bacteria capable of producing the food poisoning toxin. The illness is usually over within 24 hours, but less severe symptoms may persist in some individuals for 1-2 weeks. A few deaths have been reported as a result of dehydration and other complications.Necrotic enteritis (pig-bel) caused by _C. perfringens_ is often fatal. This disease also begins as a result of ingesting large numbers of the causative bacteria in contaminated foods. Deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA.Infective dose: The symptoms are caused by ingestion of large numbers (greater than 100 0000 000) vegetative cells. Toxin production in the digestive tract (or in test tubes) is associated with sporulation. This disease is a food infection; only one episode has ever implied the possibility of intoxication (that is, disease from preformed toxin).4. Diagnosis of human illnessPerfringens poisoning is diagnosed by its symptoms and the typical delayed onset of illness. Diagnosis is confirmed by detecting the toxin in the feces of patients. Bacteriological confirmation can also be done by finding exceptionally large numbers of the causative bacteria in implicated foods or in the feces of patients.5. Associated foodsIn most instances, the actual cause of poisoning by _C. perfringens_ is temperature abuse of prepared foods. Small numbers of the organisms are often present after cooking and multiply to food poisoning levels during cool down and storage of prepared foods. Meats, meat products, and gravy are the foods most frequently implicated.6. Relative frequency of diseasePerfringens poisoning is one of the most commonly reported foodborne illnesses in the USA. There were 1162 cases in 1981, in 28 separate outbreaks. At least 10-20 outbreaks have been reported annually in the USA for the past 2 decades. Typically, dozens or even hundreds of persons are affected. It is probable that many outbreaks go unreported because the implicated foods or patient feces are not tested routinely for _C. perfringens_ or its toxin. CDC estimates that about 10 000 actual cases occur annually in the USA.7. Course of disease and complicationsThe disease generally lasts 24 hours. In the elderly or infirm, symptoms may last 1-2 weeks. Complications and/or death only very rarely occur.8. Target populationsInstitutional feeding (such as school cafeterias, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, etc.) where large quantities of food are prepared several hours before serving is the most common circumstance in which perfringens poisoning occurs. The young and elderly are the most frequent victims of perfringens poisoning. Except in the case of pig-bel syndrome, complications are few in persons under 30 years of age. Elderly persons are more likely to experience prolonged or severe symptoms.9. Food analysisStandard bacteriological culturing procedures are used to detect the organism in implicated foods and in feces of patients. Serological assays are used for detecting enterotoxin in the feces of patients and for testing the ability of strains to produce toxin. The procedures take 1-3 days.""The FDA discussion notes that deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA but seems to have occurred in this instance. The following is a paper regarding a case of pig-bel:Gui L, Subramony C, Fratkin J, Hughson MD: Fatal enteritis necroticans (pigbel) in a diabetic adult. Mod Pathol. 2002; 15(1): 66-70; <http://www.nature.com/modpathol/journal/v15/n1/full/3880491a.html>""AbstractEnteritis necroticans is a segmental necrotizing infection of the jejunum and ileum caused by _Clostridium perfringens_, type C. The disease occurs sporadically in parts of Asia, Africa, and the South Pacific, where it primarily affects children with severe protein malnutrition. The disease is extremely rare in developed countries, where it has been seen primarily in diabetics. Two cases have previously been reported in the United States, one in a child with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes. A 66-year-old woman with a 12-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus developed severe abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea after eating a meal of turkey sausage. She died unattended at home. An autopsy showed peritonitis and segmental necrosis of the jejunum and ileum. Microscopic examination showed Gram-positive club-shaped bacilli consistent with Clostridia coating a necrotic mucosa. Products of cpa and cpb genes of _C. perfringens_, type C were identified in the necrotic jejunum by polymerase chain reaction amplification"". - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/209>.]
