Public Health Agency of Canada [edited]<http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/phn-asp/2017/salmonella-enteritidis-eng.php>Public Health Notice -- Outbreak of _Salmonella_ infections linked to frozen raw breaded chicken products--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The Public Health Agency of Canada is collaborating with provincial public health partners, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, and Health Canada to investigate an outbreak of _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Enteritidis infections in 4 provinces with cases of human illness linked to frozen raw breaded chicken products._Salmonella_ is commonly found in raw chicken and frozen raw breaded chicken products. The risk to Canadians is low and illnesses can be avoided if safe food handling, preparation, and cooking practices are followed when preparing these types of food products.This outbreak is a reminder that frozen raw breaded chicken products contain raw poultry and should be handled and prepared no differently from other raw poultry products. Follow cooking instructions carefully and verify the internal temperature after cooking, as recommended, before consuming these products. Frozen raw breaded chicken products must be cooked to a safe internal temperature of at least 74 deg C (165 deg F) to ensure they are safe to eat.Investigation summary---------------------Currently, there are 7 cases of salmonellosis in 4 provinces: British Columbia (1), Alberta (4), Ontario (1), and New Brunswick (1). 2 people have been hospitalized. No deaths have been reported. Individuals became sick between April and May of 2017. The majority of cases (71 percent) are male. The average age of cases is 26 years.Based on the investigation findings to date, exposure to frozen raw breaded chicken products has been identified as a source of illness. The outbreak investigation is active, and the public health notice will be updated on a regular basis as the investigation evolves.Who is most at risk?--------------------Anyone can become sick with salmonellosis, but infants, children, seniors, and those with weakened immune systems are at higher risk of serious illness because their immune systems are more fragile than healthy individuals.Most people who become ill from salmonellosis will recover fully after a few days. It is possible for some people to be infected with the bacterium and not get sick or show any symptoms, but still be able to spread the infection to others.What you should do to protect your health?------------------------------------------While frozen raw breaded chicken products may appear to be pre-cooked or browned, they contain raw chicken and should be handled and prepared no differently from other raw poultry products. If you are preparing frozen raw breaded chicken products, such as nuggets, strips, or burgers, the following precautions should be taken to protect your health:- do not eat raw or undercooked frozen breaded chicken products. Cook all frozen breaded products to an internal temperature of at least 74 deg C (165 deg F) to ensure they are safe to eat;- because of uneven heating, microwave cooking of frozen raw breaded poultry products including chicken nuggets, strips, or burgers is not recommended. Always follow package cooking instructions, including products labelled Uncooked, Cook and Serve, Ready to Cook, and Oven Ready;- wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water before and after handling frozen raw breaded chicken products;- use a separate plate, cutting board, and utensils when handling frozen raw breaded chicken products to prevent the spread of harmful bacteria;- use a digital food thermometer to verify that frozen raw breaded chicken products have reached at least 74 deg C (165 deg F). Insert the digital food thermometer through the side of the product, all the way to the middle. Oven-safe meat thermometers that are designed for testing whole poultry and roasts during cooking are not suitable for testing nuggets, strips or burgers.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The key to preventing foodborne salmonellosis is a combination of adequate cooking and appropriate kitchen hygiene as outlined in this posting. It is important to know that microwave cooking can be inadequate because the potential for uneven heating in these devices. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12>.]
