ANSA [edited]<http://www.ansa.it/english/news/general_news/2017/06/28/first-tetanus-case-in-30-years_afb31c37-713f-4623-90bf-384dad9fd460.html>An unvaccinated 10-year-old boy has developed tetanus, the 1st case in children in Italy for 30 years, after falling off his bike and cutting his head in Sardinia last weekend [24-25 Jun 2017], sources said. The boy's parents reportedly refused treatment with an anti-tetanus gel, sources at Oristano hospital said.The boy's condition is improving and his life is not in danger although he has typical symptoms including muscle cramps and some paralysis of cranial nerves, they said.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is unclear from the report what is meant by ""anti-tetanus gel"" but probably is specific hyper-immune tetanus immunoglobulin although the following post states it was tetanus toxoid. If the child was truly unimmunized against tetanus, a combination of passive protection with immunoglobulin and active immunization with toxoid is always recommended. - Mod.LL]******[2]Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 10:17 CEST+02:00Source: The Local [edited]<https://www.thelocal.it/20170629/childs-tetanus-case-is-first-in-30-years>A 10-year-old boy in Sardinia has been diagnosed with tetanus. ""It's an incredibly rare case,"" Giovani Zanda, head of the pediatric ward at San Martino Di Oristano Hospital in western Sardinia, told Corriere della Sera. It is the 1st registered case of tetanus in a child in Italy for 30 years, according to a spokesperson for the country's National Health Institute.The 10-year-old boy was admitted to hospital with a cut to his forehead caused by a bicycle injury a few weeks ago. Doctors back then suggested a tetanus vaccination as a precaution but the parents apparently refused it. When the child returned to hospital weeks later, the tetanus had already incubated and reached an acute stage, according to a report in ANSA. Doctors were alerted to the tetanus symptoms after the patient experienced facial paralysis. The child has been treated and is said to be in a stable condition.The case however has raised alarm bells and adds weight to the government's much-discussed recent law that makes vaccinations a mandatory part of school inscription. The law makes 12 vaccinations obligatory for all children. These include, among others, preventive vaccinations for measles, hepatitis B and, tetanus. Several northern regions have legally challenged the decree. According to the new law, families who don't vaccinate their children aged between 6 and 16 will be fined and directed to make an appointment with their closest health center.Families who don't adhere to the law could be fined up to 7500 or even have be stripped of custody, according to Wired. The law comes into effect from the beginning of the 2017-2018 school year and there is a one-year transition period envisioned. According to the Ministry of Health's own guidelines, the main changes to the law involve an increase in the number of compulsory vaccinations from 4 to 12. Vaccinations also become a mandatory prerequisite for registration in kindergartens for children aged up to 6.""The tetanus case represents an exception that certainly could have been avoided if the young patient had been vaccinated,"" said Zanda, the doctor who treated the child with tetanus, as reported in Corriere della Sera.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This case is reported to be the 1st case of tetanus in a child in Italy but certainly not the 1st case of tetanus in 30 years overall. The following paper discusses adult cases of tetanus in the county occurring in the period between 2001 and 2010:Filia A, Bella A, von Hunolstein C, et al: Tetanus in Italy 2001-2010: a continuing threat in older adults. Vaccine. 2014;32: 639-644.Abstract:""Despite being a completely preventable disease, tetanus cases continue to occur in Italy and notification and hospitalization rates have been reported to be higher with respect to European and other industrialized countries. We examined statutory notification, hospitalization, mortality and seroprevalence data to describe tetanus epidemiology in Italy from 2001 to 2010. A total of 594 tetanus cases were notified, with an average annual incidence of 1.0/1 000 000 population. Most cases were unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated. 80 percent of cases occurred in subjects aged >64 years and a higher proportion of females with respect to males were reported in this age group. The annual number of hospital admissions was 1.4-1.7 times greater than the number of notifications in the same year. The mean annual number of reported deaths was 21. Seroprevalence data show progressively higher susceptibility levels with increasing age. Over 50 percent of persons aged 45-64 years and over 2 3rds of subjects ‰ä´65 years had tetanus antibody levels <0.01 IU/ml. Results show that tetanus is a continuing problem in Italy and, as in other countries, most cases occur in older adults, especially elderly women. The observed differences in notification and hospitalization rates suggest underreporting by physicians. In recent years, Italy has accounted for most cases reported annually in the European Union (EU) but different case definitions are used. In Italy, a confirmed case is one that meets the clinical case definition while the EU case definition classifies confirmed cases as those with laboratory confirmation of disease. The incidence of clinical tetanus in Italy is 10-fold higher than in other industrialized countries, like Australia and Canada, likely due to higher susceptibility levels in Italy. In view of the low prevalence of tetanus antibodies in adults ‰ä´45 years, strategies to improve vaccine uptake in this population group need to be implemented.""Tetanus is a potentially fatal disease characterized by skeletal muscle rigidity and painful convulsive spasms, which are caused by a potent neurotoxin, tetanospasmin, produced by the vegetative form of _Clostridium tetani_, an anaerobic spore-forming Gram-positive bacillus. _C. tetani_ is a member of the normal intestinal flora of animals, including humans. Tetanus usually occurs following contamination of wounds by soil or animal feces in which the spores of _C. tetani_ can be found.Tetanus may follow surgical procedures, burns, deep puncture wounds, crush wounds, otitis media, dental infection, animal bites, abortion and pregnancy. The presence of necrotic tissue and/or foreign bodies increases risk for tetanus because they favor growth of _C. tetani_. Tetanus can also follow injection of contaminated illicit drugs.Neonatal tetanus occurs usually in developing countries in infants with infection of the umbilical stump who are born to a non-immune mother. Infants of actively immunized mothers acquire passive immunity that protects them from neonatal tetanus. Tetanus is not directly transmitted from person to person.Tetanus occurs in people who are inadequately immunized, i.e., people who have not completed the primary series and received appropriate boosters. Recovery from tetanus is not necessarily associated with immunity, and primary immunization is indicated after recovery from tetanus.A discussion of wound management and treatment of tetanus can be found at:<http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/downloads/tetanus.pdf>.The following is extracted from the CDC vaccination recommendations for tetanus(<http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/tetanus/default.htm>):""There are 4 combination vaccines used to prevent diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis: DTaP, Tdap, DT, and Td. Two of these (DTaP and DT) are given to children younger than 7 years of age, and 2 (Tdap and Td) are given to older children and adults. Several other combination vaccines contain DTaP along with other childhood vaccines.Children should get 5 doses of DTaP, one dose at each of the following ages: 2, 4, 6, and 15-18 months and 4-6 years. DT does not contain pertussis and is used as a substitute for DTaP for children who cannot tolerate pertussis vaccine. Td is a tetanus-diphtheria vaccine given to adolescents and adults as a booster shot every 10 years, or after an exposure to tetanus under some circumstances. Tdap is similar to Td but also contains protection against pertussis. Adolescents 11-18 years of age (preferably at age 11-12 years) and adults 19 through 64 years of age should receive a single dose of Tdap. For adults 65 and older who have close contact with an infant and have not previously received Tdap, one dose should be received. Tdap should also be given to 7-10 year olds who are not fully immunized against pertussis. Tdap can be given no matter when Td was last received.[Upper-case letters in these abbreviations denote full-strength doses of diphtheria (D) and tetanus (T) toxoids and pertussis (P) vaccine.Lower-case ""d"" and ""p"" denote reduced doses of diphtheria and pertussis used in the adolescent/adult-formulations. The ""a"" in DTaP and Tdap stands for ""acellular,"" meaning that the pertussis component contains only a part of the pertussis organism.]."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/13544>.]
