MMWR 66(25);663-667 [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6625a2.htm?s_cid=mm6625a2_w>Multistate Outbreak of _Salmonella_ Anatum Infections Linked to Imported Hot Peppers -- United States, May-July 2016--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Foodborne salmonellosis causes an estimated one million illnesses and 400 deaths annually in the USA (1). _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Anatum is one of the top 20 Salmonella serotypes in the USA. During 2013-2015 there were approximately 300-350 annual illnesses reported to PulseNet, the national molecular subtyping network for foodborne disease surveillance. In June 2016, PulseNet identified a cluster of 16 _S._ Anatum infections with an indistinguishable pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) pattern from 4 states. In April 2016, the same PFGE pattern had been uploaded to PulseNet from an isolate obtained from an Anaheim pepper, a mild to medium hot pepper. Hot peppers include many pepper varieties, such as Anaheim, jalapeÌ±o, poblano, and serrano, which can vary in heat level from mild to very hot depending on the variety and preparation. This rare PFGE pattern had been seen only 24 times previously in the PulseNet database, compared with common PFGE patterns for this serotype which have been seen in the database hundreds of times.Local and state health departments, CDC, and the FDA investigated to determine the cause of the outbreak. A total of 32 patients in (states were identified with illness onsets from 6 May 2016 - 9 Jul 2016. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) was performed to characterize clinical isolates and the Anaheim pepper isolate further. The combined evidence indicated that fresh hot peppers were the likely source of infection; however, a single pepper type or source farm was not identified. This outbreak highlights challenges in reconciling epidemiologic and WGS data, and the difficulties of identifying ingredient-level exposures through epidemiologic investigations alone.Epidemiologic Investigation---------------------------During June [2017], local and state health departments in 7 states interviewed patients with standard foodborne illness questionnaires. By [Thu 29 Jun 2017], 14 patients had been interviewed; commonly reported foods eaten in the week preceding illness included tomatoes (71 percent of respondents); pork (64 percent); avocado/guacamole (57 percent); jalapeÌ±os, a hot pepper that can vary from mild to hot heat (36 percent); and cantaloupe (36 percent). These exposures were compared with the 2006-2007 FoodNet Population Survey, which summarizes data on foods eaten by a sample of healthy persons (<https://www.cdc.gov/foodnet/surveys/population.html>). The only food exposure reported significantly more frequently than expected among patients was avocado/guacamole (p = 0.01); however, because the FoodNet Population Survey does not include questions on jalapeÌ±os, it was not possible to make a comparison for that exposure. Up to 7 of the 14 interviewed patients reported eating at Mexican-style restaurants in the week preceding illness onset.The lack of a strong hypothesis for the outbreak source led CDC to propose open-ended interviews by a single interviewer. Open-ended interviews are unstructured, conversational interviews that sometimes identify uncommon exposures because they gather more detailed information than that typically obtained from standard interviews (<https://www.cdc.gov/foodsafety/outbreaks/investigating-outbreaks/investigations/sources.html>). CDC completed open-ended interviews with 9 patients, including 7 from Texas, one from Colorado, and one from Illinois. Concurrently, Minnesota investigators conducted open-ended interviews with 8 patients in Minnesota and shared exposure information with CDC.A case of Salmonella Anatum gastroenteritis was defined as infection with an outbreak strain of Salmonella Anatum in a person with onset of diarrheal illness during May 6-July 9, 2016. In total, 32 cases from 9 states were identified (Georgia (one case), Illinois (2), Kansas (1), Louisiana (1), Minnesota (10), Ohio (1), Oklahoma (1), Pennsylvania (1), Texas (13)) (Figure 1 - for Figures, see original URL - Mod.LL). The median patient age was 36 years (range = 4-79 years); 19 (59 percent) were female. Illness onset dates ranged from 6 May 2016 to 9 Jul 2016 (Figure 2). Among 25 patients for whom information on hospitalization was available, 8 (32 percent) were hospitalized; no deaths were reported. Among 18 patients for whom information from initial or open-ended interviews was available, 14 reported eating, or possibly eating fresh hot peppers, or reported eating an item containing fresh hot peppers. 9 patients reported eating peppers at restaurants, 2 reported eating peppers both at restaurants and at home, and 3 did not specify a location. Among the 14 patients who had eaten peppers, 11 reported eating, or possibly eating jalapeÌ±os. No patient reported eating Anaheim peppers; most had never heard of an Anaheim pepper.One illness subcluster was identified consisting of 2 patients who did not know one another and ate at the same Mexican-style restaurant in Texas in the week preceding illness. Both dined there on the same day and consumed multiple common food items, including steak, eggs, rice, beans, mild salsa, and pico de gallo (a fresh salsa made with chopped tomatoes), hot peppers, and other fresh ingredients. The only fresh hot peppers included in reported meal items were jalapeÌ±os, used in both the pico de gallo and mild salsa. The restaurant used serrano and poblano peppers in other dishes, but neither patient reported eating these items. Because the epidemiologic evidence supported hot peppers in general, but not Anaheim peppers specifically, investigators explored multiple hot pepper types as possible outbreak vehicles.Traceback Investigation-----------------------Local and state investigators visited restaurants where patients reported consuming peppers. They collected recipes for reported menu items, including salsa, and reviewed invoices to identify common ingredients. To identify the source of hot peppers, FDA conducted traceback (the process of tracing a food from point-of-service to its origin or manufacturer source) from 3 restaurants in Minnesota and Texas where patients reported eating. Two of the 3 restaurants received peppers from a consolidator/grower in Mexico (consolidator/grower B) (Figure 3), which exported Anaheim peppers to the USA in April 2016. Consolidators pool foods from different growers or growing locations; this designation is also used if some growers/growing locations are unknown (<https://www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/ImportProgram/default.htm>). The 3rd restaurant received peppers from various firms in Mexico; however, this restaurant had received peppers from consolidator/grower B before this outbreak. Because of the complicated supply chain for peppers and the extensive mixing of peppers from different suppliers, repacking, and reselling of product, FDA was unable to identify a single source farm or point of contamination for peppers.In April 2016, before the identification of cases and as part of routine surveillance cultures of produce, the FDA isolated this strain of _S._ Anatum from an Anaheim pepper sample. This Anaheim pepper was collected from consolidator/grower B, which supplied 2 restaurants reported to have been visited by patients in this outbreak. FDA collected 7 additional samples of hot peppers, including serrano, habanero, jalapeÌ±o, and bell peppers, from consolidator/grower B as part of the outbreak investigation; none yielded Salmonella.Laboratory Investigation------------------------Representative clinical isolates and the Anaheim pepper isolate were further characterized by WGS (<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/369523>). High-quality single-nucleotide polymorphism (hqSNP) analysis indicated that 19 clinical isolates and the Anaheim pepper isolate differed by 0-3 hqSNPs, suggesting they were highly related genetically. This strong laboratory evidence was key to aiding in interpretation of the epidemiologic data.Public Health Response----------------------On 21 Jun 2016, before the epidemiologic investigation began, FDA placed consolidator/grower B on import alert for Anaheim peppers because they could be contaminated with salmonellae. (A product under an import alert is held at the port of entry before being allowed to enter the country. The importer must provide FDA evidence that the product is free from salmonellae within 10 business days of detention of the product; otherwise, the product cannot be imported.) There were only 2 outbreak-associated illnesses reported after the import alert was issued.Discussion----------In this outbreak, the only food sample yielding salmonellae matching the outbreak strain was an Anaheim pepper, which patients did not report consuming, perhaps because they were unfamiliar with this pepper variety or could not identify the pepper variety they consumed at restaurants in salsas or other dishes with chopped peppers. Although only 2 of the 3 restaurants included in the informational traceback investigation received peppers from the same consolidator/grower, it is possible that contaminated peppers cross-contaminated other foods or materials along the supply chain, providing a mechanism for the outbreak strain to reach the 3rd restaurant. In addition, it is possible that the 3rd restaurant did receive contaminated peppers during the outbreak timeframe, but the traceback was unable to uncover this because the companies involved kept incomplete records. However, no observations were made to support or refute either of these hypotheses. The strong genetic relationship between the clinical and food isolates, in combination with the epidemiologic and traceback evidence, indicated that fresh hot peppers were the likely source of the outbreak. Nevertheless, it was not possible to implicate one pepper type or source farm.The epidemiologic investigation relied on review of restaurant-specific recipes, because pepper varieties were difficult to identify when used as ingredients in foods, particularly when prepared at restaurants. In addition, because many common ingredients are consumed in Mexican-style meals, it was difficult to narrow a hypothesis based on epidemiologic information alone. Similar challenges were documented in previous investigations, including a 2008 Salmonella Saintpaul outbreak that sickened 1500 people; investigators ultimately determined that both fresh jalapeÌ±o and serrano peppers were outbreak sources after initial evidence indicated tomatoes might have been the source (2).This outbreak highlights the importance of preventing produce contamination to reduce the risk for foodborne illness, especially for foods that are often consumed raw. Many patients consumed peppers at restaurants, often in dishes like fresh salsa, which are served raw. A 2009 study of salmonellae in fresh salsa found that chopped jalapeÌ±os were more supportive of growth than some other raw vegetable ingredients when stored at 53å¡F-69å¡F (12å¡C-21å¡C) (3). Survival and growth varied with salsa formulation and were inhibited only in recipes containing both fresh garlic and lime juice (3); further research is needed to assess the microbiologic effects of these formulations. For all recipes, no growth was detected at 39å¡F (4å¡C ), underscoring the importance of proper temperature controls at restaurants (3). All fresh produce, including hot peppers, should be thoroughly washed before preparation and consumption, and refrigerated as soon as possible to prevent the proliferation of bacteria such as salmonellae.This outbreak also highlights new challenges in outbreak investigations when trying to reconcile epidemiologic data with WGS results indicating that clinical and food isolates are genetically closely related to one another. Although WGS can provide additional resolution of the relatedness of isolates, it should not be used as the sole source of evidence (4). Careful review of all available epidemiologic, traceback, and laboratory data is critical to determining the source of foodborne outbreaks as enhanced molecular techniques are implemented.References----------1. Scallan E, Hoekstra RM, Angulo FJ, et al: Foodborne illness acquired in the United States--major pathogens. Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17: 7-15.2. Barton Behravesh C, Mody RK, Jungk J, et al: Salmonella Saintpaul Outbreak Investigation Team. 2008 outbreak of Salmonella Saintpaul infections associated with raw produce. N Engl J Med 2011;364: 918-927.3. Ma L, Zhang G, Gerner-Smidt P, Tauxe RV, Doyle MP: Survival and growth of Salmonella in salsa and related ingredients. J Food Prot 2010;73: 434-44.4. Leekitcharoenphon P, Nielsen EM, Kaas RS, Lund O, Aarestrup FM: Evaluation of whole genome sequencing for outbreak detection of Salmonella enterica. PLoS One 2014;9:e87991.[Authors: Hassan R, Rounds J, Sorenson A, et al]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The vehicles transmitting the infection were likely food in which the hot pepper was served uncooked or foods with uncooked ingredients that were cross-contaminated by the hot peppers.For non-aficionados of hot peppers, the ""heat"" of hot peppers is measured by the Scoville scale. The Scoville scale (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scoville_scale>) is a measurement of the pungency (spicy heat) of chili peppers, or other spicy foods as reported in Scoville heat units (SHU), a function of capsaicin concentration. Capsaicin is one of many related chemicals, collectively called capsaicinoids. The scale is named after its creator, American pharmacist Wilbur Scoville. His method, devised in 1912, is known as the Scoville Organoleptic Test. Unlike methods based on high-performance liquid chromatography, the Scoville scale is a subjective measurement dependent on the capsaicin sensitivity of testers and so is not a precise or accurate method to measure capsaicinoid concentration.A table (from the same URL) reflecting peppers and their SHUs is:855 000 - 2 480 000:Dragon's Breath, Carolina Reaper, Komodo Dragon Chili Pepper, Trinidad Moruga Scorpion, Naga Viper pepper, Infinity Chili, Naga Morich, Bhut jolokia (ghost pepper), Trinidad Scorpion Butch T pepper, Bedfordshire Super Naga, Spanish Naga Chili,350 000 - 580 000:Red Savina habanero100 000 - 350 000:Habanero chili, Scotch bonnet pepper Datil pepper, Rocoto, Madame Jeanette, Peruvian White Habanero, Jamaican hot pepper, Fatalii Wiri Wiri, Bird's eye chili50 000 - 100 000:Malagueta pepper, Chiltepin pepper, Piri piri, Pequin pepper, Siling Labuyo, Capsicum Apache30 000 - 50 000:Guntur chilli, Cayenne pepper, AjÌ  pepper, Tabasco pepper, Capsicum chinense10 000 - 30 000:Byadgi chilli, Serrano pepper, Peter pepper, Chile de ÌÁrbol, Aleppo pepper, Cheongyang chili pepper, Peperoncino3500 - 10 000:Guajillo pepper, 'Fresno Chili' pepper, JalapeÌ±o, wax (e.g. Hungarian wax pepper)1000 - 3500:Anaheim pepper, Pasilla pepper, Peppadew, Poblano (or Ancho), Poblano verde, Rocotillo pepper, Espelette pepper100 - 1000:Banana pepper, Cubanelle, Paprika, Pimento0:Bell pepperSince most of those interviewed for the study did not know what an Anaheim pepper looks like (it is commonly sold at neighborhood grocery stores with Cubanelles, Banana peppers, JalapeÌ±os, Serranos and Scotch bonnets, the picture of the Anaheim pepper can be found at:<https://foleysproduce.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Anaheim-Peppers.jpg>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
