Eurosurveillance, Volume 22, Issue 26 [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22824>Hepatitis E virus infection in Europe: surveillance and descriptive epidemiology of confirmed cases, 2005 to 2015-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection is one of the leading causes of acute viral hepatitis worldwide with 4 different genotypes (1-4) responsible for most human infections. HEV genotype 3 predominates in high-income countries, including those in Europe. Transmission of this genotype is usually zoonotic and has been linked to the consumption of pork products, and in some instances, shellfish [1-3]. Infection, which is most often asymptomatic, may cause an acute self-limiting hepatitis, with symptomatic infection more commonly reported among men older than 50 years of age [4,5]. Reports of chronic infection among immunocompromised people or those with pre-existing liver disease have been described [4].There is evidence that HEV is an under-recognized pathogen in high-income countries, and that the incidence of confirmed cases has been steadily increasing over the last decade [6-10]. Although population studies have shown stable or decreasing seroprevalence rates [11,12], some countries have reported a consistently high seroprevalence and proportion of HEV-RNA-positive blood donors [13-16]. A systematic review conducted by the WHO reported HEV seroprevalence (as denoted by presence of IgG antibody) to range from 0.03 percent to 52 percent among the general population and blood donors in the WHO European Region, with the highest prevalence reported from studies in blood donors from France and the Netherlands [17]. Evidence of current HEV infection in up to 77 percent of patients presenting with symptomatic acute hepatitis suggests that the virus could be a considerable cause of liver morbidity in European countries [17]. However, the use of different serological test systems significantly influences the estimates of seroprevalence [18].Europe-wide surveillance is not in place for hepatitis E, and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has launched a number of activities that aim to better understand the current epidemiology, as well as the national monitoring systems for HEV infection within European Union/European Economic Area (EU/EEA) countries. A recent study involving HEV experts from 17 countries documented an increase in reported cases in nearly all EU/EEA countries that provided data, with France, Germany, England and Wales, and the Netherlands reporting more hepatitis E than hepatitis A notifications. The study also highlighted a lack of consistency in the reporting of cases, and wide variation in surveillance activity and case definitions [7]. The current study builds on this work to conduct a wider assessment of testing, diagnosis, surveillance activities and confirmed cases of HEV infection in the EU/EEA in order to inform the Europe-wide response to this emerging infection.Methods-------A semi-structured survey of EU/EEA countries was conducted during 2015/16. The survey was divided into 4 sections (surveillance, testing and diagnosis, data on diagnosed cases, and transfusion-associated HEV infections) to allow separate country-level respondents for each topic area with a total of 24 open and closed questions [19]. A pilot survey was conducted at a meeting of the ECDC HEV expert group in December 2015, and a revised survey was subsequently circulated by email to nominated representatives of ECDC's networks, the National Focal Points for Food- and Waterborne Diseases and Zoonoses as well as for Microbiology and Surveillance, in February 2016. Respondents were given 3 weeks to complete the survey (which could be completed electronically), and email and phone reminders were used to follow up with those who had not responded.Returned survey data were manually extracted into Excel and double-checked. Any unclear responses were checked by email communication with the respective experts. Analyses were conducted in Excel and STATA version 13. The United Kingdom (UK) provided 3 separate responses (from England and Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland) which were considered as a single country response for all quantitative analyses and listed separately for qualitative analyses. A descriptive analysis was performed. The proportion of hospitalized cases was calculated using data exclusively from countries reporting hospital data, with the number of total cases as denominator. The Eurostat population database from 2015 was used as source of population denominator data [20].Results-------All EU/EEA countries with the exception of Liechtenstein responded to the survey, giving a response rate of 30 out of 31. The data provided from countries that conduct surveillance was comprehensive, detailed and of high quality.Hepatitis E surveillance systems:Of 30 responding countries, 20 had specific surveillance systems for HEV infection. The remaining 10 countries had more generic viral hepatitis syndromic surveillance with no plans to develop any specific surveillance for HEV infection. Of the 20 EU/EEA countries with specific systems for HEV infection, 15 had national surveillance systems, 3 had laboratory surveillance through national reference laboratories with unknown coverage, 1 had blood service surveillance with unknown coverage, and 1 had a sentinel surveillance system covering approximately half of the population.A total of 13 of 20 surveillance systems specific for HEV infection had a case definition for confirmed cases. There was wide variation in the type of case definition used: 7 used laboratory and clinical definitions, and 6 used a laboratory definition only (Figure 1 - for Figures and Tables, see original URL - Mod. LL0. Most surveillance systems collected demographic information as well as the date of notification and onset of disease, whereas morbidity and mortality data were collected less frequently (Table 1). Two countries' surveillance systems (Ireland and the UK (England and Wales)) differentiated between acute and chronic HEV infection: acute infection was defined as both HEV-IgM-positive and IgG-positive, or HEV-RNA-positive, and chronic infection was defined as HEV RNA persisting for at least 3 months.Hepatitis E testing and diagnosis---------------------------------A total of 26 countries conducted HEV testing in their own countries, with 2 countries sending samples abroad for testing and 2 reporting their testing availability as unknown. In 12 countries, there were less than 5 laboratories able to conduct diagnostic tests for HEV. Laboratories in 20 countries used more than one type of test (Table 2). For HEV antibody testing in acute cases, IgM ELISA was used in 21 countries and IgM Western Blot in 11. Of the 22 countries using any IgM antibody test, 20 also used IgG ELISA and nine IgG Western Blot for the detection of IgG antibodies. Up to 19 countries reported that they were able to conduct HEV RNA testing; all used serum/plasma and 12 also used stool specimens. Up to 17 countries reported that HEV sequencing was conducted for epidemiological investigations (15 countries), for research purposes (14 countries) or as routine practice (10 countries). Ten countries provided information on why a laboratory might conduct a test for HEV. Two countries had a laboratory policy on testing for HEV: (i) UK (Scotland), where some laboratories automatically test for HEV if alanine transaminase (ALT)‰Ûäwas ‰ä´‰Ûä100 U/L, and (ii) Ireland, where an HEV test is automatically conducted if a test for hepatitis A virus (HAV) is requested. The remaining countries reported that HEV testing was conducted only at the request of a clinician.Confirmed cases of hepatitis E virus infection----------------------------------------------A total of 22 countries covering 469 million people (i.e. 91 percent of the EU/EEA population of 514 million people) provided data on confirmed cases of hepatitis E (Figure 2). The total number of reported cases increased from 514 cases in 2005 to 5617 cases in 2015, with 21 018 cases overall during the 11-year period studied (Figure 2). A total of 93 percent (19 531/21 018) of cases were accounted for by countries that have had hepatitis E-specific surveillance since at least 2005, and 80 percent (16 810/21 018) of cases were reported from just 3 countries (Germany, France, and the UK), which comprise 41 percent of the EU/EEA population. In 16 countries providing data on the age of reported cases, the overall proportion of those aged more than 50 years increased from 30-47 percent during 2005-2008 to 60-61 percent during 2013-2015. In 17 countries providing data on the sex of reported cases, the proportion of male cases remained stable over 2005-2015, ranging from 61 percent in 2005 and 2015 to 69 percent in 2006.Severity associated with hepatitis E virus infection----------------------------------------------------Data from 14 countries reporting on the total number of hospitalizations related to HEV infection showed an increase from 85 hospitalized cases in 2005 to 1115 in 2015 (Figure 3). Most of this increase could be accounted for by 4 of the 5 countries that have conducted reporting on hospitalization status since at least 2005. Over the same time period, the proportion of cases being hospitalized has decreased from 80 percent (85/106 cases) to 55 percent (1115/2023 cases). Up to 12 countries provided data on deaths associated with HEV infection, with 5 countries recording these data since 2005. In total, 28 fatal cases were reported by 5 countries (Austria, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary and Italy), increasing from 0-2 cases per year during 2005-2011 to 4-8 cases per year during 2012-2015.Travel history of diagnosed cases---------------------------------Up to 15 countries provided data on travel history. Of hepatitis E cases reported in these countries during the period 2005-2015, 87 percent (13 511/15 525) were autochthonous (defined as locally acquired within the reporting country). The proportion of known autochthonous cases increased from 45-73 percent per year during 2006-2011 to 89-97 percent per year during 2012-2015. This suggests that the considerable increase in confirmed cases observed after 2011 (Figures 2 and 4) can largely be accounted for by locally acquired infection. A very small number of cases per year (9-36 cases) were known to be associated with travel outside of the EU/EEA.Discussion----------This study assessed testing policy and practice, laboratory diagnosis, and surveillance systems and activities for HEV infection in 31 EU/EEA countries. Up to 30 of the countries responded to the survey, providing the most comprehensive picture to date of HEV as an emerging infection among humans in Europe. The 10-fold increase in the number of cases reported between 2005 and 2015, more than 21 000 confirmed cases overall and a total of 28 deaths, underline the relevance and emerging nature of this zoonotic infection in Europe.The survey findings demonstrate a varied response to hepatitis E across EU/EEA countries; while 2 3rds of countries have established surveillance systems, a 3rd of countries have no specific surveillance and no plans to develop any. For those with existing surveillance, nearly one 3rd do not apply a case definition for HEV infection nationally. Only 19 countries reported that they were able to conduct HEV RNA testing in-country, although there may be testing within hospitals or private settings that the national public health institutes or survey respondents are unaware of. In most countries, it was not possible to ascertain the criteria for referral or for HEV test requests. While there may be an increasing awareness of locally acquired HEV infections, there is still concern that within parts of the clinical community, HEV is not considered as a possible cause of hepatitis unless there is a recent history of travel. It is therefore likely that the infection remains under-diagnosed. There also appears to be a gap in knowledge around the testing protocols used in outpatient and hospital settings within countries, which should be investigated further to understand when, who, and why patients are tested for HEV.Up to 22 countries (comprising more than‰Ûä90 percent of the total EU/EEA population) were able to provide data on confirmed cases for at least some of the period 2005-2015. These data demonstrate that the number of reported cases has been increasing year-on-year, with a more than threefold increase between 2011 and 2015. The majority of cases were reported by 3 countries (the UK, France and Germany) that have had surveillance systems in place since at least 2005. A small number of countries reported changes to surveillance systems during the study period; for example, Belgium created a national reference centre for HEV in 2011 and Portugal commenced web-based notification in 2014. However, there were no changes that could have contributed substantially to the increase in the number of confirmed cases. A greater awareness of and increased testing for HEV, particularly of patients presenting with acute hepatitis by general practitioners in outpatient settings, is likely to be one of the contributing factors e.g. through the inclusion of HEV in some standard diagnostic protocols. The rise in the number of symptomatic cases might also be related to the switch in virus subtypes that has been observed in some EU/EEA countries [7,21].The concurrent increase in number of hospitalizations (a measure of increased HEV infection severity) and gradual decrease in proportion of total cases hospitalized between 2005 and 2015 may suggest better outpatient diagnosis and an increase in the sensitivity of the diagnostic system, i.e. a change in testing practice from hospitals to community settings. For cases where clinical information was recorded, every second case was admitted to hospital and there were 2 to 8 deaths associated with HEV infection annually during 2011-2015. These figures appear high for a disease that has previously been considered to be a mild self-limiting infection [22]. However, a testing bias and overestimation of the hospitalization rate can be assumed because of a higher likelihood that cases of severe liver disease or other comorbidities are tested for HEV. Notably, only 4 countries were able to provide data on morbidity status since 2005 and only 5 were able to provide data on case fatality since 2005, although nearly half of the EU/EEA countries indicated that they are able to collect this information as of 2015. More data are needed to address the lack of knowledge in this area.As our results show, the number and proportion of autochthonous HEV infections has been increasing since 2005. Only a very small number of cases were known to be related to travel outside of the EU/EEA. Although genotype data were not requested from countries, it is known that autochthonous cases tend to be due to HEV genotype 3, the same genotype present in European pigs and consumed pork products; travel-related cases would be expected to be infected with genotype 1 or 4 [2-5]. Lately, there appears to have been a change in circulating subtypes in Europe. For example, the number of subtype 3c recently exceeded the numbers of subtypes 3e, f and g in humans in England and Wales [21]. Such changes may be contributing to the emergence of HEV as an important infection in humans. Changes in the pattern of food preparation and consumption may also be implicated. A case-control study in England and Wales identified pork sausages and ham purchased in supermarkets as possible sources of infection, raising concerns about whether current practice in preparing these products is sufficient to prevent HEV infection [23]. More studies among humans, animal populations and on food are essential to informing on possible sources of HEV infection.The main limitations of this study are the variation in the denominator data for reported cases of hepatitis E (most countries were only able to provide a subset of demographic information or a limited number of years of data) and the merging of data on reported cases of hepatitis E despite the different case definitions and testing approaches used by EU/EEA countries. These limitations have in part been addressed by showing data by year of surveillance introduction and by limiting the denominator to cases where the relevant information was known. The varying number of countries providing data inconsistently over the study period prompted us not to perform any trend analysis to avoid further introduction of bias. In the future these limitations could be addressed by standardization of surveillance systems for HEV infection, harmonization of the case definition as well as testing algorithms across EU/EEA countries. This would enable better assessment of the burden of disease due to HEV in Europe and facilitate a better understanding of the actual number of performed tests or population coverage as a denominator, thus avoiding diagnostic and surveillance artefacts.In summary, EU/EEA countries are at different stages in their surveillance and testing capacity for HEV, and there is no standardized European case definition. For the time period 2005-2015, at least 22 countries were able to report on cases infected with HEV, either through formal surveillance or existing systems of laboratory notifications. WHO's global health sector strategy on viral hepatitis asks countries to establish surveillance for viral hepatitis, particularly in blood donors [24]. Our study describes the availability of general hepatitis E surveillance in most EU/EEA countries. These data demonstrate a Europe-wide increase in reported cases, as well as a high number of reported HEV-related hospitalizations and a total of 28 deaths, between 2005 and 2015. They also provide a better understanding of the epidemiology and burden of HEV as an emerging cause of liver-related morbidity in EU/EEA countries.References [see original URL - Mod.LL][Authors: Aspinall EJ, Couturier E, Faber M, et al]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This important study clearly underscores the importance of zoonotic hepatitis E (primarily genotype 3) as the cause of hepatitis E emergence in Europe. There are currently 7 genotypes of HEV and genotypes 1 and 2 are not zoonotic and cause most of the HEV infections in Africa and Asia. It is these genotypes that cause increased morbidity and mortality in pregnant women. Most of the zoonotic hepatitis E cases have been recognized in the developed world, are associated with foodborne disease (usually undercooked pork products) and are caused by genotype 3. Additionally, infection with genotype 3 when occurring in immunocompromised hosts (especially solid organ transplant recipients) can cause chronic infection which can progress to cirrhosis. Ribavirin has been used to treat such individuals with chronic infection. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6010>.]
