The New Indian Express/Express Service [edited]<http://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2017/jun/30/no-anthrax-symptoms-in-animals-vaccination-on-1622559.html>After 8 positive cases of cutaneous anthrax were reported from the Kodupunjuvalasa village of Araku Valley in Vizag Agency, teams from the Animal Husbandry department administered vaccination to 8942 animals, including cattle, goat and sheep, at 5 villages in 10-km [6.21 miles] radius on Thursday [June 2017]: [5243 cattle and 3699 sheep and goats in 16 revenue villages in relation to known and confirmed cases].While the patients are undergoing treatment in the dermatology department of the King George Hospital (KGH) in Vizag, the survey teams found no suspected cases. During a survey, the team of Animal Husbandry department found no animal infected or in ill-health condition.""When we inquired of the villagers, it was found that meat of a dead goat which had anthrax was consumed by a group of villagers, who developed skin infections after 3 weeks,"" said Koteswara Rao, the joint director, Animal Husbandry department.According to the Animal Husbandry Department officials, animals should be buried in 6 foot deep. The spores of animals will be in soil for more than 60 years. It is mostly during rainy season that the alkaline levels will make the spores active. Any animal which drinks the infected water or eats grass, it will contract anthrax.""In the case of severely infected animal, it will die within hours. Soon after the tribals distribute the meat among the neighbors without the knowledge of how it died,"" Rao said. Meanwhile, the teams which surveyed the surrounding villages in the agency area found no such anthrax symptoms in any animal.Out of a total of 21 persons of Kondipunjuvalasa who consumed the meat of the infected goat, 8 were reported positive and are being treated at the dermatology department of the KGH. According to DMHO Uma Sundari, the patients are slowly getting the symptoms of cutaneous anthrax. ""As a precautionary measure, we have asked the PHC to treat them,"" said the DMHO.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The incubation period for anthrax is a function of exposure dose, so cases appearing after 3 weeks will have had a minimal exposure. Sterne vaccine is a live livestock vaccine and provides protection for 9+ months; all immunity in anthrax is temporary, even from a clinical exposure, whether in humans or cattle. Repeat cases have been seen and documented. With humans the repeat infection is after about 10 years; with livestock it is sooner though one will see 10-year cycles of multiple cases in wild life.The Animal Husbandry Department is to be congratulated on their structured and careful response. With reasonable luck that should be the end of it for the while. Of course the newspaper articles and TV news reports can stimulate awareness and otherwise silent livestock owners may now raise their hands in regard to unexpected animal deaths and ask for help. Which when you come to think of it is the very purpose of such reporting. The more often livestock owners report such events, the greater the chances of effective control. Waiting for human cases to surface is dodgy at best. Remember it was just 8 persons out of 21 (38 percent) developed skin lesions and in this instance there were no gastroenteric cases, fortunately. The meat must have been well cooked. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/297>.]
