AIDS Map [edited]<http://www.aidsmap.com/page/3153134/>New cases of hepatitis A cases have soared in Western Europe over the past 6 months as a result of an epidemic in gay and bisexual men, the European Centre for Disease Control reported last week [week of 25 Jun-1 Jul 2017]. ECDC says that almost 1500 cases of hepatitis A have been identified as linked, in 3 outbreaks, predominantly in men who have sex with men. A further 2660 cases are still being investigated and 10 countries have reported an increase in cases compared with 2016. Public authorities in France, Portugal and the United Kingdom have already issued warnings about the hepatitis A outbreak to gay men, recommending that gay men get vaccinated.Almost 800 of these cases have been reported in France, concentrated in the Ile-de-France (221), Hauts-de-France (157), Auvergne-Rh̫ne-Alpes (79) and Provence-Alpes-C̫te d'Azur regions.Numerous cases have also been reported in Spain, the United Kingdom, Portugal, Italy and Germany. The Spanish outbreak may be the largest; over 1800 cases have been reported in gay and bisexual men or in men aged 18-45 who haven't been exposed to contaminated food or water. ECDC warned earlier this month [July 2017] that gay men planning to attend the WorldPride festival in Madrid should get vaccinated against hepatitis A. Genetic sequencing shows that 3 separate strains of hepatitis A are being transmitted among gay and bisexual men in Europe. One outbreak so far comprising 509 cases was 1st identified in 2 men who reported visiting the same sex club in Amsterdam during the 2016 EuroPride festival.The outbreaks have probably not reached a peak yet, ECDC says. Delays in reporting of cases and sequencing of virus mean that surveillance figures lag 2 to 3 months behind actual diagnoses, especially in Spain and Portugal.Hepatitis A virus is shed in feces and can be transmitted through food or drink contaminated with feces. Hepatitis A can also be acquired through sexual contact, especially oral-anal sex (rimming). Fingers, hands or penises that come into contact with the anus and then the mouth could also provide a route of transmission.HAV vaccine shortages have been reported in some European countries, including Spain, Portugal, France, Italy, Austria, Denmark and Sweden. Vaccine manufacturers say that global supplies are stretched due to production problems and that shortages could persist to the end of 2018. In the meantime, ECDC says that where hepatitis A vaccination is not offered to all gay and bisexual men, the following groups ought to be prioritized: - Men living in areas where there are ongoing outbreaks. - Men travelling to countries where an outbreak has been reported. - Men attending Pride festivals. - Men at high risk of severe outcomes if they are infected with hepatitis A (confected with hepatitis B and /or C, people who inject drugs).[Byline: Keith Alcorn]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Because of specific sexual practices, men who have sex with men (MSM) are known to have a higher risk of acquiring hepatitis A and, if not vaccinated in childhood, should be immunized if found to be anti-HAV negative.In an Italian study (Bordi L, Rozera G, Scognamiglio P, et al. Monophyletic outbreak of hepatitis A involving HIV-infected men who have sex with men, Rome, Italy 2008-2009. J Clin Virol. 2012; 54(1): 26-9, abstract available at <http://www.journalofclinicalvirology.com/article/S1386-6532(12)00015-7/abstract>), a large and long-lasting (18 months or longer) monophyletic outbreak of hepatitis A is reported in the Rome metropolitan area (at least since July 2008), involving a high proportion of HIV-infected MSM. All the infections detected in MSM were attributable to a monophyletic strain of HAV, circulating also in other parts of Europe around the same period. Outbreaks like this can take place despite circulation of heterologous HAV strains in the general population.The recommendations for HAV vaccination in susceptible adults from the United States' Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP] are to vaccinate any person seeking protection from hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection and people with any of the following indications: - men who have sex with men; - people who use injected or non-injected illicit drugs; - people working with HAV-infected primates or with HAV in a research laboratory setting; - people with chronic liver disease and people who receive clotting factor concentrates; - people traveling to or working in countries that have high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A; and - unvaccinated people who anticipate close personal contact (such as household or regular babysitting) with an international adoptee during the 1st 60 days after arrival in the United States from a country with high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A. The 1st dose of the 2-dose hepatitis A vaccine series should be administered as soon as adoption is planned, ideally 2 or more weeks before the arrival of the adoptee.The HAV vaccination history of the cases is not stated. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/11767>.]
