Business recorder [edited]<http://www.brecorder.com/2017/07/03/356895/sindh-health-department-confirms-naegleria-induced-death-in-karachi/>Sindh health department has confirmed the 1st naegleria induced death of the year [2017] in Karachi claiming that concerned authorities have been approached to ensure proper treatment, with major focus on adequate chlorination of the water supplied to the citizens.Dr. Zafar Mehdi, provincial health department's focal person talking to APP here on [Mon 3 Jul 2017] said that a resident of Gulberg died of the infection recently.Naegleria or the ""brain eating amoeba"" infection is caused due to amoebas found in untreated municipal water, untreated well water, untreated swimming pools and spas as well as in warm lakes and mud puddles, etc.Current showers and standing water on lanes and roads enhances the risk as the amoeba thrives in warm and polluted water, said senior medical practitioner Dr. Ahsan Samad.Dr. Zafar Mehdi, however, claimed that needed measures were being adopted for naegleria prevention and control and that all possible sources in local context were being made for health safety of the public. ""Our focus is not only on municipal water but equal attention is also being paid towards swimming pools, spas as well as water parks,"" he said adding that rain water has been largely drained out from different parts of the metropolis.""The idea is to ensure that people are in no way exposed to non-chlorinated or inadequately chlorinated water,"" emphasized the health department's focal person, reiterating that the peculiar virus cannot survive in properly treated water.In reply to a question, he agreed that urgent measures were needed for proper chlorination of water supplied to the Karachiites with equal attention towards adequate treatment of water that is used for bathing, face washing, swimming. ""In a nutshell water that can in any manner enter into nostrils of the water users has to be treated and safe to use,"" said the health department's focal person.About the committee constituted by the government to ensure regular verification of chlorine level in the essential commodity available in the metropolis, he said it is being reactivated. Dr Zafar Mehdi said KWSB and all other concerned departments have been approached for the purpose.[Byline: Parvez Jabri]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Please refer to the comment in the 3 Sep 2014 ProMED-mail posting of a similar case from Pakistan (archive no 20140903.2746573), which describes ""the religious rite of ablution included in Yogic, Ayurvedic, and Islamic traditions. Within the Islamic faith, ritual nasal rinsing is included in a cleansing process called wudu, or ablution. It is usually performed several times a day in preparation for prayer, according to CDC. The deadly parasite has also been contracted via the use of neti pots. These practices where water is introduced into the sinuses is an obvious route of infection with _Naegleria fowleri_.""It has not been proven that chlorination of water reduces risk and cases are usually infected in lakes and rivers, and infection through piped water supplies has not been documented. - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/947>.]
