Penn State News [edited]<http://news.psu.edu/story/473380/2017/06/28/research/bats-have-potential-host-avian-and-human-influenza-viruses-study>Bats, which make up about 1/3 of all mammalian species, play an important role in our ecosystem. They eat bugs that ""bug"" us, pollinate more than 500 species of plants, including banana and cacao, and distribute the seeds of many other plants. However, they also can carry diseases that are dangerous to humans, such as rabies.But they were never thought to host influenza viruses, until researchers studying pathogen diversity in bats in South and Central America identified 2 new influenza viruses in fruit bats. Subsequently, researchers in Africa found 30 percent of the bats they tested were infected with a flu virus, although these bats did not show any signs of illness.These discoveries led Suresh Kuchipudi, associate professor of virology in Penn State's College of Agricultural Sciences, to ask: ""Can bats be co-infected with avian and human influenza viruses? If so, can they act as carriers of influenza virus? Do they have the potential to contribute to the emergence of new pandemic influenza strains by mixing these 2 types of influenza viruses?""To answer these questions, Kuchipudi brought together a multidisciplinary team to conduct research focusing on little brown bats, the most widely spread bat species in North America.""Although bats are elusive creatures, there is increasing interface between them and humans as a result of wildlife trade, bush-meat hunting, deforestation and urban development,"" said Kuchipudi, who works in the college's Animal Diagnostic Laboratory. ""It's important to determine if bats can allow infection of avian and human flu viruses, and if they could then serve as 'mixing vessels' and perhaps create the next pandemic flu virus. Up until now, no one has ever studied influenza virus receptors in bats.""Influenza infects a wide range of domestic and wild animals. Some are highly specific to one kind of host, but others can be passed between species. ""Swine flu"" and ""avian flu"" are examples of previous pandemics in humans caused by influenza viruses that came from animals. Avian flu viruses continue to cause huge economic losses to the poultry industry and can threaten public health if they gain the ability to cross over into humans. Co-existence with another kind of flu virus in some other species, such as a bat, could provide them the genetic material they need to jump species.""The remarkable thing about influenza viruses is the ability to constantly change and evolve,"" Kuchipudi said. ""Influenza virus evolution involves mutations in the virus to gain the ability to transmit to a completely different host species.""With assistance from the Pennsylvania Game Commission, Kuchipudi's research team screened 20 little brown bats -- 10 juvenile and 10 adult -- for the presence of influenza receptors using cutting-edge scientific methods involving lectin histochemistry, along with confocal and electron microscopy. The team tested for the presence of 2 specific receptors that are responsible for helping human and avian influenza viruses attach to cells. They further investigated whether avian and human flu viruses can bind to bat tissues.""The study discovered that bats have the receptors in their respiratory and digestive tracts that are able to support binding of avian and human influenza viruses,"" said Ruth Nissly, research technician and manager of Kuchipudi's research lab. ""Having both receptors, as in the case of ducks and pigs, is believed to create conditions that enable the virus to mutate and create a new strain, which, in turn, could infect other animals, including humans.""Despite these findings, Kuchipudi said there is not yet a need to worry about a ""bat flu."" ""While the sum of the evidence suggests that bats could play an important role in influenza epidemiology and zoonotic influenza emergence, we do not have sufficient scientific understanding to adequately predict which influenza strains may cause the next pandemic or what hosts they may come from,"" he said.He cited the need for more research on how influenza may manifest itself in bats, as well as for additional surveillance of wild bats.Other Penn State researchers on the project were Shubhada Chothe, doctoral candidate in pathobiology, who carried out many of the experiments; Gitanjali Bhushan, undergraduate student in immunology and infectious disease; Yin-Ting Yeh, postdoctoral scholar in physics; Jenny Fisher, clinical assistant professor in veterinary and biomedical sciences; Mauricio Terrones, professor of physics, chemistry and materials science and engineering; and Bhushan M. Jayarao, professor of veterinary and biomedical sciences.The team also included Justin Brown, wildlife veterinarian with the Pennsylvania Game Commission and adjunct associate professor in veterinary and biomedical sciences; Gregory Turner, wildlife biologist, Pennsylvania Game Commission; Brent Sewall, assistant professor of biology, Temple University; and DeeAnn Reeder, presidential professor of biology, Bucknell University.The research, funded by Penn State's Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences Department, Eberly College of Science and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service was published in April 2017 in Scientific Reports, an online, open access journal from the publishers of Nature.[Byline: Amy Duke]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Influenza viruses can evolve by all known methods, including 'reassortment'. This is the ability of forming a chimera after a host cell has been infected by 2 different strains, i.e. a novel virus that is a mixture of the original viruses that co-infected the cell. This is why animals that can be infected by avian and human strains are of concern, because co-infection in them can produce a novel virus that has the ability of human-to-human transmission (as the original human virus) but greater pathogenicity (acquired from the avian virus). This is what was previously observed in swine, which are thought to have been the vessel for viral mixings that resulted in the 1918, 1957 and 1968 pandemic influenza viruses.The study shows that avian and human virus have the potential to infect bat cells, but further research is needed to assess the processes and patterns of the bat-virus interactions following exposure by avian and human influenza viruses. Are bats tolerant and become infected at high intensities? Do bats mount an immune response (resistance), and thus the infection is transient and viral shedding low? Are bats little tolerant and die soon after infected? The outcomes largely depend on the defense strategies bats have against influenza viruses, and would also determine the significance of bats for the epidemiology of influenza viruses of medical and veterinary importance. The scientific article referred to and entitled ""Avian and human influenza virus compatible sialic acid receptors in little brown bats"" can be accessed at <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-00793-6>Abstract:Influenza A viruses (IAVs) continue to threaten animal and human health globally. Bats are asymptomatic reservoirs for many zoonotic viruses. Recent reports of two novel IAVs in fruit bats and serological evidence of avian influenza virus (AIV) H9 infection in frugivorous bats raise questions about the role of bats in IAV epidemiology. IAVs bind to sialic acid (SA) receptors on host cells, and it is widely believed that hosts expressing both SA ë±2,3-Gal and SA ë±2,6-Gal receptors could facilitate genetic reassortment of avian and human IAVs. We found abundant co-expression of both avian (SA ë±2,3-Gal) and human (SA ë±2,6-Gal) type SA receptors in little brown bats (LBBs) that were compatible with avian and human IAV binding. This first ever study of IAV receptors in a bat species suggest that LBBs, a widely-distributed bat species in North America, could potentially be co-infected with avian and human IAVs, facilitating the emergence of zoonotic strains.- Mod.PMB]
