bdnews24.com [edited]<http://bdnews24.com/health/2017/07/10/media-reports-on-chikungunya-not-correct-iedcr>The government's disease monitoring arm has refuted media reports on chikungunya saying 'confusion' has been created over the number of people suffering from the viral disease.The IEDCR released a statement on [Sun 9 Jul 2017] saying the story of one in 11 people suffering from this Aedes Aegypti mosquito-borne disease being published in the media is ""not correct"". It pointed out that the report might have been picked up from an incomplete telephone-based survey of the IEDCR. It had conducted a telephone-based survey among 4775 people. Of them, 357 gave the information that they were suffering from fever and joint pain, the symptoms of chikungunya.But they were not tested later for the confirmation of the disease. The IEDCR said the survey was still ongoing and data compilation and analysis incomplete. Based on that survey, none should come to any conclusion, the disease monitoring agency said.It does not provide any information regarding the number of chikungunya patients but gives an idea about the presence of the disease, said the statement.Chikungunya has struck so much fear into the people that a lawyer has even filed a writ petition in the court demanding proper actions.The High Court on [Sun 9 Jul 2017] issued a rule asking why it will not order authorities to compensate patients diagnosed with chikungunya.However, IEDCR had advised the people from the beginning not to trouble themselves with running tests for the disease since it does not have any treatment.Both dengue and chikungunya show some common symptoms such as fever and pain. But in chikungunya the pain is so severe that people cannot move. It involves all the joints, doctors say. It can be misdiagnosed, but both of them have no specific treatment. Treatment is mainly focused on relieving the symptoms. Paracetamol is the drug of choice for relieving both fever and pain. So there is no need to wait for testing, experts say.General awareness is important as the Aedes mosquito usually breeds in a small collection of clean water in and around houses, such as inside a flower vase. Intermittent rains cause a proliferation of the breeding when water accumulates in different containers around homes.The IEDCR advises removal of all open containers with stagnant water in and around the houses on a regular basis - flower plates and pots, used tires, tree holes and rock pools.However, the institute could not explain the reports of widespread fever in the capital.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The 1st identified chikungunya outbreak occurred in Bangladesh in 2008. Later in 2011, a major outbreak was reported from Dhaka district, which was later confirmed to be chikungunya (<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0003907>). This indicates that both the virus and the vector are prevalent in the country, resulting in outbreaks in various geographical areas.Efforts to improve surveillance and identify outbreaks more quickly could provide an opportunity for public health actions, such as mosquito control, to reduce transmission. WHO guidelines suggest that environmental interventions, such as destroying natural and human-made mosquito breeding sites in and around homes, may be more cost-effective than chemical methods to kill larvae and adult mosquitoes [WHO Guidelines for Prevention and Control of Chikungunya Fever. 2009].In the report above, as the available information on actual laboratory confirmed Chikungunya cases is not available, even though the data from the survey indicates that the case numbers might be lower, the factual situation can only be ascertained through sentinel or other surveillance initiatives supported by laboratory diagnostics. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/153>.]
