Dhaka Tribune [edited]<http://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/nation/2017/07/12/mysterious-disease-children-chittagong/>A mysterious disease has killed 9 children while 35 others still remain sick in a remote hilly area of Sitakunda in Chittagong.Up to 26 of the children from the minority Tripura community have been admitted to Bangladesh Institute of Tropical and Infectious Disease (BITID) Fouzderhat in Chittagong. The children at Sonaichhari in Baro Awlia under Sitakunda upazila reportedly come down with fever, rash, diarrhea, vomiting and respiratory problems all at the same time.A medical team from BITID is currently in the area and is collecting samples from the affected children.Officials at Chittagong Medical College Hospital (CMCH) said 9 children affected by the unidentified disease were admitted to ward 9 of the hospital on [Wed 12 Jul 2017].Dr Azizur Rahman Siddiqui, civil surgeon of Chittagong, told the Dhaka Tribune that 9 children had died in just 4 days. He confirmed that the children did not die from dengue or chikungunya disease. ""All the victims affected by the unidentified disease belong to the Tripura community. Four children died yesterday,"" said the civil surgeon.""We are yet to identify the disease. A team from Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR) has already been dispatched to the area to collect samples of the disease,"" he said.""The children affected by the unknown disease are showing symptoms of fever, rash, diarrhea, vomiting and respiratory problem for the last 3 days,"" added Dr Siddiqui.Nazmul Islam Bhuiyan, Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO) of Sitakunda told the Dhaka Tribune that all children affected by the unidentified disease are within 1 - 15-years-old.""We have asked the people of the local ethnic community not to send their children to educational institutes for some days to check the spread of the unknown disease,"" said the UNO, adding that the local ethnic community had tried to conceal the outbreak of the disease.""From the symptoms of the disease, we primarily suspect that the children of the area have been affected by a viral outbreak. However, we are examining the health of the affected children and collecting blood samples,"" said Dr Mamunur Rashid, member of the BITID medical team visiting the area.Shashi Kumar's 12-year-old daughter affected by the disease now lies at a bed in CMCH. ""My daughter fell sick 4-5 days ago. At first we thought it was just a fever. We could not realize the severity of the disease. My daughter has shown symptoms like rash, fever and abdominal pain,"" added Shashi Kumar.[Byline: Anwar Hussain]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Using Gideon Online, the most likely etiology for this symptom complex in children in Bangladesh would be enterovirus (64 percent), followed by herpesvirus 6 (14 percent), (relapsing fever 10 percent) and ""miscellaneous"" respiratory viruses (6 percent). Non-polio enterovirus infection is a highly likely candidate. Patients with enterovirus infections may present with symptoms as benign as an uncomplicated summer cold or as threatening as encephalitis, myocarditis, or neonatal sepsis. Rash is often part of the clinical presentation. Manifestations of infection with these viruses can include upper respiratory tract infections and acute flaccid paralysis. From 2005 -- 2007, 4.7 percent of 106 children with acute encephalitis were infected with enterovirus 75 in southern India (from Lewthwaite P. et al. Emerg Infec Dis 16(11). November 2010.www.cdc.gov/eid DOI: 10.3201/eid1611.100672).With respect to human Herpesvirus 6, (HHV-6), it includes a set of 2 closely related herpes viruses known as HHV-6A and HHV-6B. HHV-6B infects nearly 100 percent of human beings, typically before the age of 3 and often results in fever, diarrhea, sometimes with a rash known as roseola. Although rare, initial infection with HHV-6B can cause febrile seizures, encephalitis or intractable seizures.Primary HHV-6B infection usually occurs in infants and it is the most common cause of fever-induced seizures in children aged 6--24 months.HHV-6 is the single most common cause of hospital visits in infants with fever. Approximately 20 percent of HHV-6 infections manifest as roseola, which is characterized by the abrupt onset of an initial febrile phase of 3-5 days, with temperatures reaching 40å¡C [104å¡F]. With the fever, some children exhibit bilateral periorbital edema in the prodrome.This initial phase may be followed by an erythematous maculopapular rash that appears when the temperature normalizes. The rash starts at the trunk and spreads centrifugally to the face and limbs. More commonly, the infection presents as an acute nonspecific febrile illness in a child younger than 2 years. HHV-6 infection may also manifest as a rash and no fever.Symptoms reported in children may include the following: Irritability, ear symptoms, otitis, upper respiratory tract symptoms, gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, including liver dysfunction and hepatitis, fever-induced seizures, bulging fontanelles, and symptoms of meningoencephalitis(Excerpted and edited from: <https://hhv-6foundation.org/what-is-hhv-6>; <http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/219019-overview>;<http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/219019-clinical>).Any information on this outbreak would be welcome by ProMED.A map of Bangladesh can be found at <http://www.graphatlas.com/bangladesh_map_city_town_regions.jpg> - Mod LK][The HealthMap/ProMED map of the Chittagong Division, Bangladesh can be found at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/24772>. - Mod.MPP]******[2] EpiCore Surveillance Project response to RFIDate: 13 Jul 2017Source: EpiCore Surveillance Project [edited]This unknown illness outbreak among children is currently being investigated by the concerned agency. Unofficial channels suggest that this outbreak predominantly affected the children of an aboriginal population in Sitakundu leading to the hospitalization of 26 children with 9 deaths. Given the [relative isolation, both geographically and culturally] of the aboriginal population in Bangladesh, combined with poor accessibility of healthcare and preventive services in such hard-to-reach areas, it is likely that these children have never received the vaccines under the national immunization program including measles vaccine. Given the paediatric age group of affected patients and the clinical presentation, it would be important to exclude measles encephalitis from the list of differential diagnoses where measles could be severe in these unvaccinated communities.--Communicated by:EpiCore Surveillance Project member[ProMED-mail would like to thank the EpiCore member for a rapid response, reminding us that measles should be included in the differential diagnosis for a rash illness associated with both gastrointestinal as well as respiratory symptoms.  Especially given the relative isolation of this population both in terms of their geographic location - in remote areas with reduced access to health care services, especially vaccinations.We await further information on this outbreak as it becomes available. - Mod.MPPThe Government of Bangladesh had planned to conduct a nationwide campaign against measles and rubella (MR) targeting 52 million children from 9 months to under 15 years of age. Each child was to have been vaccinated with 1 dose of MR vaccine irrespective of their previous vaccination status. It was hoped the mass vaccination would lead to elimination of measles and control rubella by 2016, according to the WHO. But with the remoteness of the affected population, they very well may not have been reached in this effort. - Mod.LK]
