M.A. Liebert, Inc. publishers [edited]<https://doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2017.2110>Reference: Hermance Meghan E. and Thangamani Saravanan. Powassan Virus: An Emerging Arbovirus of Public Health Concern in North AmericaAbstractPowassan virus (POWV, Flaviviridae) is the only North American member of the tick-borne encephalitis serogroup of flaviviruses. It is transmitted to small - and medium-sized mammals by _Ixodes scapularis_, _Ixodes cookei_, and several other _Ixodes_ tick species. Humans become infected with POWV during spillover transmission from the natural transmission cycles. In humans, POWV is the causative agent of a severe neuroinvasive illness with 50 percent of survivors displaying long-term neurological sequelae. POWV was recognized as a human pathogen in 1958 when a young boy died of severe encephalitis in Powassan, Ontario, [Canada] and POWV was isolated from the brain autopsy of this case. There are 2 distinct genetic lineages of POWV now recognized: POWV (lineage I) and deer tick virus (lineage II). Since the index case in 1958, over 100 human cases of POWV have been reported, with an apparent rise in disease incidence in the past 16 years. This recent increase in cases may represent a true emergence of POWV in regions where the tick vector species are prevalent, or it could represent an increase in POWV surveillance and diagnosis. In the past 5 years, both basic and applied research for POWV disease has intensified, including phylogenetic studies, field surveillance, case studies, and animal model development. This review provides an overview of POWV, including the epidemiology, transmission, clinical disease, and diagnosis of POWV infection. Recent research developments and future priorities with regard to the disease are emphasized.Conclusions and Future Research PrioritiesSeveral recent studies suggested that the disease incidence of human POWV cases is rising in the United States (Hinten et al. 2008, Piantadosi et al. 2016). There is a growing possibility that POWV, like other _I. scapularis_-vectored pathogens, is an emerging human disease in regions with enzootic cycles of POWV and where _I. scapularis_ are abundant (Nofchissey et al. 2013). Yet, with the overall lack of public awareness and infrequency of POWV testing in patients presenting with symptoms of encephalitis, the actual incidence of POWV cases is likely underestimated. Recently, it was shown that some tick populations in Wisconsin are coinfected with _Borrelia burgdorferi_ and DTV, suggesting that DTV coinfections may be underdiagnosed and could contribute to the persistent symptoms associated with some Lyme disease cases (Knox et al. 2015). The effect of Borrelia coinfection on POWV transmission is not well studied and should be addressed in future research.It will be beneficial to pursue long-term vector and host surveillance in areas where human POWV cases have been identified. Screening in both adult and immature ticks collected from the field will provide a better understanding of the role each tick life stage plays in enzootic POWV transmission cycles. Furthermore, field surveillance programs will likely provide additional POWV strains, which will be instrumental in characterizing the evolutionary forces that shape POWV populations (Ebel 2010, Brackney and Armstrong 2016).Currently, there is a limited understanding of the host antiviral response to POWV infection; therefore, future laboratory studies should examine the POWV replication cycle within mammalian and tick cells. By pursuing this knowledge gap, future studies can begin to evaluate new targets for therapeutic intervention. One of the major challenges in this field, and a future priority for POWV research, is the identification of factors that enable POWV to persist in nature while promoting human infection and pathogenicity. Consequently, it is crucial to determine the molecular mechanisms of tick-host-POWV interactions.To better understand the neurological sequelae observed in many POWV patients, additional cohort studies with extended follow-up times should be conducted. The majority of POWV strains currently available for molecular genomics were isolated from ticks; therefore, laboratories that are equipped to isolate POWV from clinical samples should be encouraged to do so. Additional isolates of POWV derived from human tissue will enable comparative pathogenicity studies, which will be particularly useful in determining whether there are differences between POWV and DTV pathogenesis.Along with the apparent rise in POWV cases, there has been a steady increase in the basic and applied research for POWV disease. In the upcoming years it will be important to maintain this research momentum and to increase clinician vigilance and public awareness.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Recent reports of cases of Powassan virus infection in the USA this year (2017) have brought this virus to the attention of the public health community. This report provides an excellent overview of the history and current understanding of Powassan virus. It includes the history, epidemiology, genetics, clinical features of infection, diagnosis, treatment and prevention and the future directions (given above) as well as a list of cited references. Interested readers can access these details at the above URL. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/222>.]
