Central Maine [edited]<http://www.centralmaine.com/2017/07/13/maine-cdc-rare-mosquito-virus-reported-in-kennebec-county/>An unnamed adult in Kennebec County was hospitalized after showing symptoms of Jamestown Canyon virus [infection], which is carried by a species of mosquitoes found in Maine, state officials said [Thu 13 Jul 2017].A Kennebec County resident was diagnosed recently with a rare illness transmitted by mosquitoes, prompting the Maine Center for Disease Control to advise Mainers to protect themselves from the insect.The unnamed adult in Kennebec County showed symptoms of Jamestown Canyon virus [infection] as early as June [2017], according to a news release [Thu13 Jul 2017] from the Maine CDC. The adult was hospitalized and is recovering at home, the agency said.This may be the 1st reported case of Jamestown Canyon virus [infection] in the state, according to Siiri Bennett, the state epidemiologist. The virus is ""relatively rare,"" Bennett said. One study found that only 31 cases of the disease were found nationally over a 14-year period. None of the cases was in Maine, and none resulted in death, she said.""I think this is the 1st case of Jamestown Canyon virus [infection] in Maine that we are aware of,"" she said. It also may be that the cases are underreported, as there is no laboratory in the state that can test for the virus.Symptoms of the virus, like others contracted from mosquitoes, include fever, neck stiffness and body aches, Bennett said. The virus also can result in meningitis and encephalitis.While some people get bitten by mosquitoes infected with viruses -- such as the better-known West Nile virus -- and never experience symptoms, others can get seriously ill. Eastern equine encephalitis, for example, can be deadly, Bennett said.""We recommend that if you have something that looks like summer flu and you get a high fever, you get it checked out,"" she said.While there isn't a cure or vaccine for the viruses, supports are available in hospitals for some of the symptoms, she said, which can make it easier for a person's body to fight the disease.""The best way to avoid this is to not get bitten,"" Bennett said. She recommends that people wear long sleeves and pants, use bug repellent on clothes and skin, use screens, and drain artificial sources of standing water, such as bird feeders. Prevention is especially important from dusk to dawn and when the temperature is above 50 degrees, which is when mosquitoes are more likely to bite. ""We want to make sure that people are aware that mosquitoes are out there,"" Bennett said. ""It's not just that they're annoying. They can be dangerous as well.""While it's still a little early to say whether this season will be especially bad, Bennett said that given the wet and early spring, ""it could be.""""In general, we tend to see these viral diseases a lot more in the late summer, early fall,"" she said, because mosquitoes get the viruses from birds -- or deer, in the case of Jamestown Canyon virus. After they've fed on the animals for a while, they're more likely to be infectious.While Jamestown Canyon virus, West Nile virus and Eastern equine encephalitis [virus] can be transmitted via a mosquito bite, none can be transferred from person to person or from an animal to a person.[Byline: Madeline St Amour}--Communicated by:Adriana Marquez E<adrianame.df@gmail.com>[The occurrence of Jamestown Canyon virus (JCV) in Maine is not surprising. It occurs across the northern tier of states in the USA and probably in southern Canada as well. As noted in previous ProMED-mail posts, JCV was 1st isolated from a pool of 9 _Culiseta inornata_ mosquitoes captured in Jamestown Canyon, Colorado, in 1961 and later shown to be widely distributed in eastern and midwestern USA. Boreal [northern] _Aedes_ and _Ochlerotatus_ mosquitoes are the primary vectors. As with the other California serogroup Orthobunyaviruses, transovarial virus transmission is common, with newly emerging female mosquitoes already infected with the virus in the spring and ready to transmit the virus. White-tailed deer, _Odocoileus virginianus_ are the principal amplification hosts.As Drs Charles Calisher and Paul Grimstad pointed out in ProMED-mail archive no. 20040807.2171, JCV frequently seems to be forgotten as an etiological agent of human disease, and provided the following references:1. Grimstad, P.R., C.L. Shabino, C.H. Calisher, and R.J. Waldman. A case of encephalitis in a human associated with a serologic rise to Jamestown Canyon Virus. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 31:1238-1244, 1982.2. Grimstad, P.R., R.N. Haroff, B.B. Wentworth, and C.H. Calisher. Jamestown Canyon (California serogroup) is the etiologic agent of widespread infection in Michigan humans. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 35:376-386, 1986.3. Deibel, R., S. Srihongse, M.A. Grayson, P.R. Grimstad, M.S. Mahdy, H. Artsob, and C.H. Calisher. Jamestown Canyon virus: the etiologic agent of an emerging human disease? in: Proc. Int'l. Symp. Calif. Serogr. Viruses. C.H. Calisher and W.H. Thompson (eds.). Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York, pp: 313-325, 1983.4. Grayson, M.A., S. Srihongse, R. Deibel, and C.H. Calisher. California serogroup viruses in New York state: a retrospective analysis of subtype distribution patterns and their epidemiologic significance, 1965-1981. in: Proc. Int'l. Symp. Calif. Serogr. Viruses. C.H. Calisher and W.H. Thompson (eds.) Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York, pp: 257-267, 1983.5. Calisher, C.H. and J.L. Sever. Are North American Bunyamwera serogroup viruses etiologic agents of human congenital defects of the central nervous system? Emerg. Infect. Dis. 1:147-151, 1995. <http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/eid/vol1no4/calishr3.htm#top>.Jamestown Canyon (JCV) and La Crosse viruses (LACV) co-circulate in the same forests in some areas, but are transmitted by different vector mosquitoes. However, _Aedes albopictus_ can become infected by and transmit both viruses. Laboratory experiments have shown that when this mosquito is dually infected with LACV and JCV, the viruses can reassort their 3 RNA strands, with 6 novel reassorted viruses resulting. As _Ae. albopictus_ extends its geographic range to the north, it may eventually become established in areas where both viruses are present, with the resulting risk of dual infections in these mosquitoes. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/222>.]
