Times of India [edited]<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/pune/monkey-fever-spreads-to-new-areas-12-people-lose-lives-in-state-till-june/articleshow/59585794.cms>Kyasanur Forest disease (KFD), or monkey fever, has spread to newer areas in the state. The virus, which was 1st reported from a village in Maharashtra's Sindhudurg district in January last year [2016], has now spread to over 60 villages. It has infected 331 people and killed 19 in Dodamarg and Sawantwadi this year [2017], so far.This has put health officials on their toes, prompting them to intensify their fever surveillance activity in the surrounding areas and initiating inter-department measures to contain the disease's spread.""The cases have gone down from June 2017 onwards, as the transmission phase of the virus is over. It will begin again from November 2017 onwards. We aim to vaccinate a maximum of people at risk to protect them against the infection. Currently, fever surveillance, tick-control measures, and awareness activity are on through inter-department coordination of health, forest and animal husbandry departments,"" state surveillance officer Pradip Awate told TOI.The virus activity that was limited to Dodamarg taluka of Sindhudurg district till last year [2016] has spread to villages in Sawantwadi from January this year [2017]. ""Monkeys keep moving from place to place. Their activity is not in our control. That's precisely the reason for the spread,"" district health officer Yogesh Sale said.The collective population of Dodamarg and Sawantwadi, which is at risk of contracting the infection, is about 67 705. ""These are the people who will be vaccinated during the 3-month vaccination drive that will start from September 2017. Vaccination during an active case-finding period is not recommended by the experts,"" Sale added.Some novel approaches are being used for surveillance activity. ""We have announced a cash prize for anyone who reports monkey deaths to us. This helps us to initiate tick-control measures speedily,"" Sale said.He added that a monkey's death by infection often indicates that humans are at risk. Hence, we conduct insecticide dusting within a 50-meter radius of any spot where a monkey dies.[Byline: Umesh Isalkar]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[KFD is a tick-borne viral hemorrhagic fever endemic to South Asia. KFD virus belongs to the family Flaviviraidae, which also includes yellow fever and dengue fever. KFDV was identified in 1957 when it was isolated from a sick monkey from the Kyasanur Forest in Karnataka (formerly Mysore) state, India. Since then, between 400-500 human cases per year have been reported.Hard ticks (_Hemaphysalis spinigera_) are the reservoir of KFD virus and, once infected, remain so for life. Rodents, shrews, and monkeys are common hosts for KFDV after being bitten by an infected tick. KFDV can cause epizootics with high fatalities in primates <https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/kyasanur/index.html>.Initially, the disease was limited to 3 taluks (Sagar, Shikaripur and Sorab) of the Shimoga district of Karnataka in India. In subsequent years, the disease spread to new districts and new states in India, including other districts in Karnataka, Kerala State Tamilnadu and Goa States.Evidence of KFD virus or related viruses was found in different parts of India (parts of the Saurashtra region in Gujarat State, forested regions west of Kolkata, West Bengal State, and the Andaman Islands) during serological studies.The increase in the number of new foci and cases indicates that eco-biological changes due to deforestation and use of new land for farming and cattle grazing could lead to spread of KFD virus to newer geographical areas. Viruses related to KFDV have been identified in China and Saudi Arabia.The disease should be differentiated from other diseases such as influenza, typhoid, dengue, malaria, leptospirosis, and the rickettsial group of fevers. For diagnosis, real-time RT-PCR can be performed from blood/serum of humans, blood and viscera of infected monkeys, or tissues of ticks. Real-time RT-PCR can detect the virus in human samples after onset of febrile illness up to the 10th day of illness.KFDV can be isolated from the blood of patients (in acute phase, 2-5 days from symptom onset), positive tick pools, or the blood or viscera of monkeys by inoculation into animal or culture. KFD anti-IgM antibodies can be detected using ELISA during the acute phase (4 days onward) of illness. KFD anti-IgG antibodies (ELISA) can be used for sero-surveillance of a human population to understand their exposure to KFDV in other areas.Prevention of KFD includes vaccination, personal protection, and control of ticks in KFD-endemic areas. A killed vaccine exists for KFD and is used in endemic areas in India. Additional preventive measures include insect repellents and wearing protective clothing (wear light coloured clothing with a long-sleeved shirt tucked into pants and long-legged pants tucked into socks and gum boots) while going to KFD-endemic forest areas. People should examine their bodies at the end of each day for ticks, and remove them promptly. Sitting or lying down on the ground should be discouraged by providing health education to villagers and tourists in KFD endemic areas. The use of spray insecticides has been recommended in a 50-meter radius around a dead monkey <http://www.searo.who.int/publications/>. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/61179>.]
