Infectious Disease News [edited]<https://www.healio.com/infectious-disease/vaccine-preventable-diseases/news/online/%7Bf4de4ff3-17af-4f93-8b78-7962259534c7%7D/after-vaccine->The risk for meningococcal disease remains high in patients using the blood disorder drug Solaris [eculizumab], even after they have received a meningococcal vaccine, according to CDC researchers.Patients should still receive meningococcal vaccines before they begin treatment with Soliris (eculizumab, Alexion Pharmaceuticals), and antimicrobial prophylaxis could be an option, the researchers wrote in MMWR.""Health care providers should continue to follow recommendations from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices for eculizumab recipients to receive both MenACWY and MenB vaccines and could consider antimicrobial prophylaxis for the duration of eculizumab treatment to potentially reduce the risk for meningococcal disease,"" Lucy A. McNamara, PhD, of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Division of Bacterial Diseases, and colleagues wrote.The drug comes with a warning of increased meningococcal disease risk. In 2014, the FDA announced that use of eculizumab is associated with a 1000 to 2000-fold increase in the risk for meningococcal disease.In their own study, McNamara and colleagues found 16 cases of meningococcal disease in patients who received eculizumab in the United States from 2008 to 2016. Of those, 11 were caused by non-groupable _Neisseria meningitidis_. 14 patients had documented treatment with at least one dose of a meningococcal vaccine before disease onset, the researchers said.Isolates taken from the 14 cases were mostly susceptible to 6 of 7 antibiotics. However, 11 isolates were resistant to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. One isolate was resistant to ciprofloxacin, and one to penicillin.10 cases involved meningococcemia -- the presence of the associated bacterium in the blood -- without meningitis, the researchers said. Meningococcemia can cause relatively mild, influenza-like symptoms [but also rapidly fatal disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC), multiorgan failure and shock].""However, these symptoms can progress to severe illness and death within hours,"" the researchers warned. ""Health care providers should have a high index of suspicion for meningococcal disease in patients taking eculizumab who develop any symptoms consistent with either meningitis or meningococcemia, even if the patient's symptoms initially appear mild, and even if the patient has been fully vaccinated or is receiving antimicrobial prophylaxis.""The CDC is asking all state health departments to fill out a report form for all meningococcal disease cases in patients receiving eculizumab. That form can be found at <http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/surveillance/index.html>.The agency asks that forms be sent by secure email to <meningnet@cdc.gov> or secure fax at 404-471-8372. If available, isolates can also be submitted for whole genome sequencing.[Byline: Joe Green][1. McNamara LA, Topaz N, Wang X, Hariri S, Fox L, MacNeil JR. High Risk for Invasive Meningococcal Disease Among Patients Receiving Eculizumab (Soliris) Despite Receipt of Meningococcal Vaccine. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . ePub: 7 Jul 2017. DOI: <http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6627e1>.]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017Source: MMWR Morbidity Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6627e1.htm#suggestedcitation>High Risk for Invasive Meningococcal Disease Among Patients Receiving Eculizumab (Soliris) Despite Receipt of Meningococcal Vaccine-------------------------------McNamara LA, Topaz N, Wang X, Hariri S, Fox L, MacNeil JR""Use of eculizumab (Soliris, Alexion Pharmaceuticals), a terminal complement inhibitor, is associated with a 1000-fold to 2000-fold increased incidence of meningococcal disease (1). Administration of meningococcal vaccines is recommended for patients receiving eculizumab before beginning treatment (2,3). Sixteen cases of meningococcal disease were identified in eculizumab recipients in the United States during 2008-2016; among these, 11 were caused by nongroupable _Neisseria meningitidis_. 14 patients had documentation of receipt of at least 1 dose of meningococcal vaccine before disease onset. Because eculizumab recipients remain at risk for meningococcal disease even after receipt of meningococcal vaccines, some health care providers in the United States as well as public health agencies in other countries recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis for the duration of eculizumab treatment; a lifelong course of treatment is expected for many patients. Heightened awareness, early care seeking, and rapid treatment of any symptoms consistent with meningococcal disease are essential for all patients receiving eculizumab treatment, regardless of meningococcal vaccination or antimicrobial prophylaxis status.""Eculizumab is licensed in the United States for treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (2); both are rare, life-threatening illnesses. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved prescribing information includes a boxed warning regarding increased risk for meningococcal disease in eculizumab recipients (2). To mitigate the occurrence of and morbidity associated with meningococcal infections, FDA requires a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) (<http://www.solirisrems.com/>) to educate health care providers and patients about the risk for and early signs of possible meningococcal infection and the need for immediate medical evaluation of signs and symptoms consistent with possible meningococcal infection. A key element of the Soliris REMS is ensuring that patients receive meningococcal vaccines. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends that eculizumab recipients receive both quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate (MenACWY) and serogroup B (MenB) meningococcal vaccines (3).""""Meningococcal disease following MenACWY vaccination in eculizumab recipients has been reported previously (1,5), and in vitro data have shown that eculizumab impairs meningococcal killing in whole blood even in subjects vaccinated against the relevant meningococcal serogroup (6). In addition, although nongroupable _N. meningitidis_ is often carried asymptomatically in the nasopharynx, it rarely causes disease in healthy persons (7).""MenACWY vaccines target the serogroup-specific polysaccharide capsule and provide no protection against nongroupable _N. meningitidis_. MenB vaccines are licensed specifically for protection against serogroup B meningococcal disease. The extent of any potential cross-protection has not been assessed. The evidence of meningococcal disease in eculizumab recipients vaccinated against the infecting serogroup, together with the susceptibility of these persons to nongroupable meningococcal strains, is consistent with the in vitro data and suggests that eculizumab therapy interferes with the ability of antimeningococcal antibodies to provide protection against invasive disease.""Many clinicians and public health agencies, particularly in the United Kingdom and France, recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis with penicillin for the duration of eculizumab treatment; macrolides are typically recommended for penicillin-allergic patients (8). Long-term penicillin prophylaxis is generally considered to be safe, although the effectiveness of this strategy for meningococcal disease prevention has not been established. Ten of the 14 isolates characterized in this analysis were fully susceptible to penicillin, three demonstrated intermediate penicillin susceptibility, and one was resistant to penicillin. This finding is consistent with recent studies of invasive meningococcal isolates in the United States, which have shown that most isolates are fully susceptible to penicillin and that penicillin resistance is very rare (9). The clinical implications of intermediate penicillin susceptibility are unclear. Meningococcal disease caused by both penicillin-resistant _N. meningitidis_ and _N. meningitidis_ with intermediate penicillin susceptibility have been reported in eculizumab recipients taking penicillin or amoxicillin prophylaxis (7,10), but patient compliance was not reported.""Although neither meningococcal vaccination nor antimicrobial prophylaxis can be expected to prevent all cases of meningococcal disease in eculizumab recipients, providers should continue to follow ACIP recommendations for eculizumab recipients to receive both MenACWY and MenB vaccines. Providers could also consider antimicrobial prophylaxis for the duration of eculizumab treatment to potentially reduce the risk for meningococcal disease. Data will continue to be evaluated and additional guidance will be developed as evidence becomes available. Heightened awareness and vigilance for symptoms consistent with meningococcal disease are essential for all patients receiving eculizumab treatment and their health care providers, regardless of meningococcal vaccination or antimicrobial prophylaxis status.""Of note, 10 cases in this report had meningococcemia without meningitis. Although a petechial or purpuric rash is a hallmark of meningococcemia, this rash might not appear until later stages of illness. Initial symptoms of meningococcemia are often relatively mild and nonspecific, and might include fever, chills, fatigue, vomiting, diarrhea, and aches or pains in the muscles, joints, chest, or abdomen; however, these symptoms can progress to severe illness and death within hours. Health care providers should have a high index of suspicion for meningococcal disease in patients taking eculizumab who develop any symptoms consistent with either meningitis or meningococcemia, even if the patient's symptoms initially appear mild, and even if the patient has been fully vaccinated or is receiving antimicrobial prophylaxis.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Eculizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that was reported to be the most expensive drug in the world in 2010, when it costs USD 409 500 a year in the United States (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki\\\b/Eculizumab>). Eculizumab binds to the complement protein C5, inhibiting its cleavage to C5a and C5b. This prevents circulation of the pro-inflammatory C5a peptide and generation of the terminal complement complex C5b-9. It is known that deficiencies in the terminal components of the complement pathway increase risk for invasive meningococcal disease. In fact, as reported above, invasive meningococcal disease occurred in 16 eculizumab recipients in the United States during 2008-2016, resulting in a 1000- to 2000-fold increase in risk for meningococcal disease for eculizumab recipients, despite some having received meningococcal vaccine prior to receipt of eculizumab. This is explained by the fact that invasive meningococcal disease in 11 of the eculizumab recipients was caused by non-groupable (i.e., nonencapsulated) _Neisseria meningitidis_, which can cause disease in vaccinated people, since there is no protective immunity induced against nonencapsulated strains by the capsular polysaccharide-based meningococcal vaccines.Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for the duration of eculizumab treatment; a lifelong course of treatment for many, because eculizumab recipients are at increased risk for meningococcal disease. Also, meningococcal vaccination is recommended at least 2 weeks prior to receiving eculizumab, unless the risks of delaying eculizumab therapy outweigh the risk of developing a meningococcal infection, in which case the meningococcal vaccine should be administered as soon as possible. Both a serogroup A, C, W, Y conjugate meningococcal vaccine and a serogroup B meningococcal vaccine are recommended for people receiving eculizumab, although the vaccinations may not prevent all meningococcal infections, especially from non-groupable _N. meningiditis_. - Mod.ML].................................................mpp/ml/msp/mpp"
