Institut Pasteur de Bangui [in French, trans. Corr.SB, edited]<http://pasteur-bangui.org/17-06-22-mission-conjointe-dinvestigation-autour-dun-cas-de-monkeypox/>The frequency of monkeypox epidemics in the Central Africa Republic [CAR] in recent years proves that this virus is endemic in some regions of the country, such as the southwest (Lobaye prefecture) and the southeast in Mbomou. However, the reservoir of the virus is poorly known even though several authors report squirrels and some rodents as probable reservoirs.From 2010 to the present, the Central African Republic has recorded 7 monkeypox epidemics in these 2 prefectures, and, although it is known that most human cases occur after contact with an animal infected during hunting activities, the reservoir species has not been formally identified, and the frequency of cases in particular in forest regions shows that deforestation activities are bringing it closer to more and more people.A 2nd case of monkeypox has just been confirmed by the Pasteur Institute of Bangui in a pygmy in a camp located in Toma in the commune of Ndolobo in the Lobaye. Following this confirmation, a mission of the Pasteur Institute, supported by the Ministry of Health and the WHO country office, made it possible to collect from a pygmy camp last weekend 26 samples from contacts, and the analysis of sera in the Pasteur Institute laboratory shows that 24 (92.3 percent) had antibodies directed against monkeypox and 4 against cowpox.These findings show a strong circulation of the virus in the region and permanent contact with the reservoir, which explains the low number of cases recorded during the epidemics, as most people are immunized.The priorities of the Pasteur Institute team in Bangui today are to reinforce surveillance at the level of fauna and to identify the reservoir species of this virus, which, in view of the increasingly close occurrence of the episodes of epidemics, seems to constitute a real public health problem for the future.--Communicated by:Nikola SklenovskaKU LeuvenLeuven, Belgium<nikolasklenovska@gmail.com>[ProMED thanks Nikola Sklenovska for submitting this report.It is not clear whether the 2 confirmed monkeypox cases mentioned above are included in an earlier report. A 30 Jun 2017 WHO report indicated that as of 2 Jun 2017, there were (susp.) 3 cases, (conf.) 1 case; During week 22, one new suspected case was reported from Mbaiki, near the border of the Republic of Congo. A previously reported suspected case (onset during week 20) was PCR negative, and 10 case contacts are currently under observation.Sporadic cases of monkeypox with occasional deaths in the CAR are not surprising. As noted in previous ProMED-mail posts, the monkeypox virus clade in the Congo Basin causes more severe disease in humans -- with a case fatality rate of 11-17 percent -- than the clade in Ghana, which causes few fatalities. The virus is seldom transmitted directly from one person to another, but there is a documented instance of that in the Republic of the Congo. Monkeys are not the reservoirs of the virus, despite the name that the virus has received. Although not determined, the main reservoirs of monkeypox are suspected to be rodents, including rope squirrels (_Funisciurus_ sp; an arboreal rodent) and terrestrial rodents in the genera _Cricetomys_ and _Graphiurus_.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the Central African Republic can be found at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/66>. - Mod.TY]
