Free Malayasia Today / Bernama [edited]<http://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2017/07/14/boy-admitted-to-melaka-hospital-for-suspected-rabies-infection/>A 6-year-old boy was admitted to the Melaka Hospital here last Wednesday [12 Jul 2017] for suspicion of having contracted rabies.State Health Department director Dr Ghazali Othman said the boy, who is a Bidayuh from Sarawak, was believed to have been bitten by a dog in Serian, Sarawak, recently. ""His father is a soldier in Melaka. Further investigation into the case is ongoing,"" he told Bernama here today [14 Jul 2017].Ghazali said the boy was currently in stable condition and under close observation.There have been 4 confirmed cases of rabies in Serian in which 3 have died. The 4th person is being treated in the paediatric intensive care unit of the Sarawak General Hospital and is in critical condition.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The discovery of rabies circulating in East Malaysia, a territory regarded earlier as rabies-free, was unfortunately made by human sentinels. The Sarawak General Hospital in Kuching notified on 22 Jun 2017 rabies in 3 children from the village Serian. Since then, 2 additional human cases (children) have been reported from the same location.The detection of rabies in humans led the veterinary authorities to perform surveillance in the dog and cat populations in Serian. According to their findings, as notified to the OIE on 11 Jul 2017 (see 20170712.5170101), out of the 461 owned dogs, 29 were found rabies positive; out of the 782 owned cats, 3 were found rabies positive. The diagnosis was based upon direct fluorescent antibody (FAT) test, performed on all samples on 8 Jul 2017 by Malaysia's National laboratory, namely the Veterinary Research Institute (VRI). No information on the vaccination history of the sampled owned animals has become available, nor data on similar surveillance applied elsewhere in East Malaysia, bordering Indonesia.These striking results, if correctly interpreted, mean that the virus has been circulating in the region for some time; since when and how far disseminated are issues yet to be established.On top of the surveillance activities and population management, particularly of unowned animals, rabies vaccination of all owned dogs and cats in East Malaysia as a preventive measure is to be completed at the earliest.The Laws of Malaysia Act 647 (Animal Act of 1953) cover special provisions relating to dogs in connection with rabies. This includes licensing (Section 38), management of rabies‰Û infected areas (Section 39), destruction or detention of an animal suspected to be infected with rabies (Section 40), detention of any dogs that have bitten a person (Section 41), and anti‰Û rabies vaccination in dogs (Section 42).According to Malaysia's periodic reports to the OIE, 4577 dogs were officially vaccinated against rabies during the 1st half of 2016; 308 dogs were vaccinated during the 2nd half of the year. How many remained unvaccinated? - Mod.ASA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/2565>.]
