KVIA [edited]<http://www.kvia.com/lifestyle/health/wound-botulism-case-confirmed-in-dona-ana-county/589427006>The New Mexico Department of Health is investigating a confirmed case of wound botulism in a 48-year-old man from Dona Ana County. The patient is an injection drug user and the suspected source of infection is either a soiled skin injection site, contaminated injection devices or contaminated heroin. The man is currently hospitalized.In 2016, NMDOH identified 3 confirmed and one probable wound botulism cases among people who inject drugs.Botulism is a rare, but potentially deadly illness caused by a nerve toxin that induces paralysis. Wound botulism is caused by the toxin produced from a wound infected with bacterium called _Clostridium botulinum_.""We are asking healthcare providers to carefully consider wound botulism in patients who are showing symptoms, especially if they have a history of injection drug use,"" said Secretary of Health Lynn Gallagher.[Byline: Carlos Rosales]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Most drug-related cases of wound botulism are related to black tar heroin which is injected subcutaneously instead of intravenously.Black tar heroin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_tar_heroin>: ""is heroin acetate. Other forms of heroin require additional steps of purification post acetylation. With black tar the product's processing stops immediately after acetylation. Its unique consistency however is due to acetylation without a reflux apparatus. As in Homebake Heroin in Australia and New Zealand the crude acetylation results in a gooey mass. Black tar as a type holds a variable admixture of morphine derivatives--predominantly 6-MAM (6-monoacetylmorphine) which is another result of crude acetylation. The lack of proper reflux during acetylation fails to remove much of the moisture retained in the acetylating agent, glacial acetic acid.""Black tar heroin is often produced in Latin America, and is most commonly found in the western and southern parts of the USA, while also being occasionally found in western Canada and Europe. It has a varying consistency depending on manufacturing methods, cutting agents, and moisture levels, ranging in quality from a black-brown tarry goo in unrefined form to a uniform, light-brown powder when further processed and cut with lactose.""People who intravenously inject black tar heroin are at higher risk of venous sclerosis than that inject powder heroin. In this condition, the veins narrow and harden, which makes repeated injection there nearly impossible. Researchers at UC-San Francisco have found that the rapidity with which black tar heroin destroys veins, along with its gummier consistency, may put people who inject it at a lower risk of HIV infection because they may be forced to inject subcutaneously (rather than into veins), and needles must be thoroughly rinsed free of 'black tar' between injections if new sterilized ones are not available.""The presence of 6-monoacetylcodeine found in tar heroin has not been tested in humans but has been shown to be toxic alone and more toxic when mixed with mono- or di- acetyl morphine potentially making tar more toxic than refined diamorphine. At least 1 study has drawn attention to lower rates of HIV infection amongst drug injectors in which black tar heroin is the major form of street-available heroin, suggesting that this may be due to the need to heat black tar heroin to dissolve it (which also inactivates any HIV present in the solution).""However, black tar heroin injectors can be at increased risk of life-threatening bacterial infections, in particular necrotizing soft tissue infection. The practice of ""skin-popping"" or subcutaneous injection predisposes to necrotizing fasciitis or necrotizing cellulitis from _Clostridium perfringens_, while deep intramuscular injection predisposes to necrotizing myositis. Tar heroin injection can also be associated with _Clostridium botulinum_ infection."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/233>.]
