Shanghai Daily [edited]<http://www.shanghaidaily.com/nation/Death-toll-from-bird-flu-raises-concerns/shdaily.shtml>China reported 13 fatalities from H7N9 bird flu in June [2017], taking the death toll since October to at least 281.There were 108 deaths in the March to May [2017] period, spurring further concern about its spread, according to data from the National Health and Family Planning Commission. The death toll tends to drop toward the end of winter.Chinese disease control experts are warning the public to stay alert for H7N9 avian flu and stay away from live poultry, with the commission saying new cases of human infection remained at a low level in the last 2 weeks of May [2017].The commission did not disclose the location of deaths or infections. The H7N9 virus is likely to strike in winter and spring, and farmers have in the recent years ramped up measures such as cleaning regimes to prevent the disease.China, the world's 3rd-largest producer of broiler chickens and the 2nd-biggest consumer of poultry, has closed some live poultry markets after people and chickens were infected by avian flu strains.A program to vaccinate poultry against the H7N9 strain will be carried out nationwide from this autumn [2017], the agriculture ministry said earlier this week [week of 10 Jul 2017].The step is part of a drive against bird flu after human cases of the virus spiked last winter [2016-17].China will also strengthen inspections and supervision on poultry being transported between provinces, the ministry said.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] BeijingDate: Thu 13 Jul 2017Source: The Poultry Site [edited]<http://www.thepoultrysite.com/poultrynews/38897/more-cases-of-h7n9-reported-in-beijing/>The Beijing Center for Disease Prevention and Control said on [Tue 11 Jul 2017] that 27 cases of human [influenza] H7N9 have been reported to authorities in Beijing so far this year [2017]. Of the 13 cases contracted in the city of Beijing itself, 6 people have died, 6 were cured, and one is undergoing medical treatment, Pang Xinghuo, deputy director of the center, said at a news conference.Most of the other cases were contracted in areas neighboring Beijing. Of those, 11 were cured and 3 are undergoing treatment, he said. The center said no apparent mutation has been detected in the virus and no human-to-human transmission of the disease has been reported in Beijing, so the public need not panic. ""The number of H7N9 cases in China is higher than usual, and Beijing is no exception,"" Mr Pang said. ""The people were infected through poultry, but there have been no concentrated outbreaks in Beijing.""China saw its biggest H7N9 outbreak over the past winter [2016-17] since the virus was 1st reported in China in 2013. A total of 352 human cases of H7N9 were reported in the 1st 2 months of this year [2017], with 140 deaths, according to the National Health and Family Planning Commission. By comparison, 57 cases were reported in the 1st 2 months of 2016, the commission said.Between 2 and 8 Jun [2017], 12 H7N9 cases were reported in 9 provincial regions in China, and the number of new cases remained low for 3 consecutive weeks, the commission said last month [June 2017]. There is no evidence that the virus is becoming more infectious to humans, it said.The Ministry of Agriculture announced in June [2017] that South China's Guangdong province and the Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region -- 2 major centers for the poultry trade in China -- had been chosen as pilot regions where all chickens, ducks, and geese will receive vaccines against the H7N9 virus. Veterinary authorities of the 2 regions may start administering vaccinations in July [2017], monitor the side effects and report the findings to the ministry, it said.The Beijing Center for Disease Prevention and Control said residents should continue to take precautionary measures to prevent infection, such as avoiding contact with live poultry and cooking eggs and meat thoroughly, even though the disease is less likely to show up in summer.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] WHO update - 19 Jul 2017Date: 19 Jul 2017Source: Disease outbreak news [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/19-july-2017-ah7n9-china/en/>On 19 Jun 2017, the National Health and Family Planning Commission of China (NHFPC) notified WHO of 5 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. On [Sat 24 Jun 2017], the NHFPC notified WHO of 10 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. On [Fri 30 Jun 2017], theNHFPC notified WHO of 6 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China.Details of the case patients----------------------------On [Mon 19 Jun 2017], the NHFPC reported 5 laboratory-confirmed human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. Onset dates ranged from 25 Apr 2017 to 6 Jun 2017. Of these 5 cases, one was female. The median age was 55 years (range 41 to 68 years). The case patients were reported from Beijing (1), Guangxi (1), Guizhou (1), Hunan (1), and Zhejiang (1). At the time of notification, there was one death. Four cases were diagnosed as having severe pneumonia. Three cases were reported to have had exposure to poultry or live poultry market, and 2 had no known poultry exposure. No case clustering was reported.On [Sat 24 Jun 2017], the NHFPC reported 10 laboratory-confirmed human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. Onset dates ranged from 5 to 19 Jun 2017. All cases were male. The median age was 53.5 years (range 31 to 79 years). The cases were reported from Anhui (1), Beijing (2), Guizhou (1), Hebei (1), Inner Mongolia (1), Jiangsu (1), Sichuan (2), and Tianjin (1). This is the 1st case reported in Inner Mongolia since the virus emerged in 2013 although 2 cases were recently reported from Shaanxi province but who had likely exposure in Inner Mongolia. At the time of notification, there were 2 deaths. Eight cases were diagnosed as having either pneumonia (4) or severe pneumonia (4). Nine cases were reported to have had exposure to poultry or live poultry market, and one had no known poultry exposure.One cluster with 2 cases was reported and both cases are from Panzhihua City, Sichuan Province, and had exposure to the same live poultry market. The cluster includes:A 79-year-old male, who had symptom onset on [Mon 12 Jun 2017] and was admitted to hospital with severe pneumonia on [Thu 15 Jun 2017], then died on [Wed 21 Jun 2017]. He was living on an upper floor of the live poultry market and passed regularly through the market.A 48-year-old male, who had symptom onset on [Wed 7 Jun 2017] and was admitted to hospital with severe pneumonia on [Sun 11 Jun 2017]. He is a seller of poultry at the same live poultry market.On [Fri 30 Jun 2017], the NHFPC reported 6 laboratory-confirmed human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. Onset dates ranged from 11 to 23 Jun 2017. Three cases were male. The median age was 37.5 years (range 4 to 72 years). The cases were reported from Guizhou (1), Shanxi (1), and Yunnan (4) provinces. At the time of notification no associated deaths were reported. Four cases were diagnosed as having either pneumonia (1) or severe pneumonia (3). Two mild cases, identified through ILI surveillance, were reported: one in a child with exposure to market poultry and one in an adult. Five cases were reported to have had exposure to poultry or live poultry market, and one had no known poultry exposure. These are the 1st cases reported with exposure to the virus in Yunnan province. Previous cases reported from Yunnan province had likely exposure in a neighbouring province.One cluster with 2 cases was reported, which include:A 33-year-old female from Wenshan, Yunnan Province had symptom onset on [Sat 17 Jun 2017] and was admitted to hospital with severe pneumonia on the same day. She had no apparent exposure to live poultry. Her sister-in-law, a 42-year-old female also from Wenshan, Yunnan Province, visited her in the hospital, developed mild symptoms on [Wed 21 Jun 2017] and was hospitalized on [Sat 24 Jun 2017]. Investigation of the case revealed that she ran a shop near a live poultry market and bought live poultry from the market on a daily basis before her symptom onset. The investigation concluded that the likely source of her infection was exposure to the virus from visiting live poultry markets. To date, a total of 1554 laboratory-confirmed human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported through IHR notification since early 2013.Public health response----------------------The Chinese government at national and local level is taking preventive measures which include: - Continuing to guide the provinces to strengthen assessment, and prevention and control measures. - Continuing to strengthen control measures focusing on hygienic management of live poultry markets and cross-regional transportation. - Conducting detailed source investigations to inform effective prevention and control measures. - Continuing to detect and treat human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) early to reduce mortality. - Continuing to carry out risk communication and issue information notices to provide the public with guidance on self-protection. - Strengthening virology surveillance to better understand levels of virus contamination in the environment as well as mutations, in order to provide further guidance for prevention and control.WHO risk assessment-------------------The number of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus and the geographical distribution in the 5th epidemic wave (i.e. onset since 1 Oct 2016) is greater than earlier waves. This suggests that the virus is spreading, and emphasizes that further intensive surveillance and control measures in both human and animal health sector are crucial.According to the epidemiological curve, the number of reported cases on a weekly basis seems to have peaked in early February [2017] and is slowly decreasing. The peak in cases this year [2017] corresponds to the timing of the peak in cases in previous years.Most human cases are exposed to avian influenza A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, and live poultry vending continues, further human cases can be expected. Additional sporadic human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) in other provinces in China that have not yet reported human cases are also expected. Similarly, sporadic human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) detected in countries bordering China would not be unexpected. Although small clusters of cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported including those involving patients in the same ward, current epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. Therefore the likelihood of further community level spread is considered low.Close analysis of the epidemiological situation and further characterization of the most recent viruses are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.WHO advice--------WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid, if possible, poultry farms, contact with animals in live poultry markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water, and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling in or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and influenza-like illness (ILI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR 2005, and continue national health preparedness actions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health. Continued vigilance is needed within affected and neighboring areas to detect infections in animals and humans. As the extent of virus circulation in animals is not clear, epidemiological and virological surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should remain high. - Mod.UBAMaps of China can be seen at <http://www.sacu.org/maps/provmap.png> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
