Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/rift-valley-fever-case-reported-mali-82063/>Health officials in the west African country of Mali confirmed a single case of Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus infection in a 10-year-old boy from Oulessebougou.This case was identified through laboratory investigations into 3 suspected yellow fever cases. All 3 samples tested negative for all arboviruses included on the molecular panel, namely: dengue, West Nile, RVF, chikungunya, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, and Ebola. However, one sample was anti-RVF virus IgM positive on serology testing by ELISA.Earlier this month [July 2017], the district rapid response team was deployed to the affected village to conduct outbreak investigation. The team observed that the affected village is served by a large diameter well, with shepherds in seasonal movement with their livestock living nearby and regularly visiting the village.Score of samples were taken from villagers and domestic animals. Test results are pending.The World Health Organization says the occurrence of a sporadic case of RVF in a village in Mali is not surprising.During August-November 2016, communities in the Tahoua Region, Niger (on the border with Mali) experienced an outbreak of RVF. And in January this year [2017], OIE confirmed RVF virus as the cause of abortions in sheep and goats across the border in Menaka, Mali (some 1700 km [1056 mi] from the abovementioned outbreaks).Nevertheless, the detection of even a single case warrants an immediate emergency response, as such cases are often an early indication of widespread infection in livestock populations, associated with abortions with devastating economic impacts. Though the disease in humans is often subclinical or mild, 8 to 10 percent of cases develop severe symptoms, including ocular disease, encephalitis and/or haemorrhagic fever.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Rift Valley fever (RVF) is endemic in may sub-Saharan countries, including Mali. Cases occur sporadically in livestock and in humans. Mod.AS provided an excellent comment on RVF previously; ""Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a peracute or acute zoonotic disease of domestic ruminants. It is caused by a single serotype of a mosquito-borne virus of the _Bunyaviridae_ family (genus _Phlebovirus_). The disease occurs in climatic conditions favouring the breeding of mosquito vectors and is characterised [in some domestic animals] by abortion, neonatal mortality, and liver damage. The disease is most severe in sheep, goats and cattle. Older, non-pregnant animals, although susceptible to infection, are more resistant to clinical disease. There is considerable variation in the susceptibility to RVF of animals of different species. Camels usually have an inapparent infection with RVF virus (RVFV), but sudden mortality, neonatal mortality, and abortion occur, and abortion rates can be as high as in cattle.""Humans are susceptible to RVFV and are infected through contact with infected animal material (body fluids or tissues) or through bites from infected mosquitoes. RVFV has also caused serious infections in laboratory workers and must be handled with biosafety and biocontainment measures. It is recommended that laboratory workers be vaccinated if possible.""RVFV is endemic in many African countries and may involve several countries in the region at the same time or progressively expand geographically over the course of a few years. In addition to Africa, large outbreaks have been observed in the Arabian Peninsula and some Indian Ocean Islands. These generally, but not exclusively, follow the periodic cycles of unusually heavy rainfall, which may occur at intervals of several years, or the flooding of wide areas favouring the proliferation of mosquitoes.""Rainfall facilitates mosquito eggs to hatch. _Aedes_ mosquitoes acquire the virus from feeding on infected animals and may potentially vertically transmit the virus [transovarily] so that new generations of infected mosquitoes may hatch from their eggs. This provides a potential mechanism for maintaining the virus in nature, as the eggs of these mosquitoes may survive for periods of up to several years in dry conditions. Once livestock is infected, a wide variety of mosquito species may act as the vector for transmission of RVFV and can spread the disease.""Low level RVF activity may take place during inter-epizootic periods. RVF should be suspected when exceptional flooding and subsequent abundant mosquito populations are followed by the occurrence of abortions, together with fatal disease marked by necrosis and haemorrhages in the liver that particularly affect newborn lambs, kids and calves, potentially concurrent with the occurrence of an influenza-like illness in farm workers and people handling raw meat.""During an outbreak, preventive measures to protect workers from infection should be employed when there are suspicions that RVFV-infected animals or animal products are to be handled.""The above and much more information is available at <http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Health_standards/tahm/2.01.18_RVF.pdf>.""Although ProMED-mail has received relatively few reports of RVF in Mali, there have been cases reported this year (2017) in neighboring Mauritania and Niger.Oulessebougou is located 80 km (50 mi) south of Bamako in southwestern Mali. A political map of Mali can be accessed at <http://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/map/mali_map.htm> and a HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Mali can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/29544>. - Mod.TY]
