Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/crimean-congo-hemorrhagic-fever-case-reported-senegal-shepherd-29004/>Health officials have reported on a single case of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) was confirmed in a young, 10-year-old shepherd (caring for 26 head of cattle) in Fatick District, Kamsat̩, Senegal. The child developed fever, headache, arthralgia, muscle pain, and vomiting on 29 Jun 2017. Upon presentation to a local clinic on 30 Jun 2017, he was febrile and lethargic with moderate epistaxis (nose bleed).Serial blood samples (the 2nd one collected on 13 July 2017) were tested by the Institut Pasteur Dakar, which revealed an increase in antibodies (IgM and IgG) against the CCHF virus, confirming a recent infection.The investigation revealed that the possible source of infection was 2 cows purchased from a city market less than 3 months prior to the event. A high prevalence of ticks was observed within the implicated herd, of which samples were collected for testing results pending.Another 15 suspected cases were identified in the community, all of whom tested negative and were excluded. Previous seroprevalence studies have highlighted that CCHF is focally endemic throughout Senegal and neighboring countries. Sporadic human infections may be expected in people with regular contact with livestock in endemic areas, but these are preventable through use of repellents, protective clothing, and gloves to prevent tick bites, and avoiding contact with blood and body fluids of livestock.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[CCHF is endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East, and Asian countries south of the 50th parallel north -- the geographical limit of the principal tick vector. The hosts of the CCHF virus include a wide range of wild and domestic animals such as cattle, sheep, and goats.Animals become infected by the bite of infected ticks and the virus remains in their bloodstream for about one week after infection, allowing the tick-animal-tick cycle to continue when another tick bites. Although a number of tick genera are capable of becoming infected with CCHF virus, ticks of the genus _Hyalomma_ are the principal vector. The CCHF virus is transmitted to people either by tick bites or through contact with infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughter. The majority of cases have occurred in people involved in the livestock industry, such as agricultural workers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians. Human-to-human transmission is possible.In May 2017, Senegal reported 2 cases of CCHF were reported that had been imported from Mauritania with history of exposure to ticks on household livestock.To prevent outbreaks of CCHF, public awareness campaigns aimed at the populations most at risk -- livestock farmers, butchers, and health personnel -- must be conducted, and the epidemiologic alert systems must be strengthened. In addition, conditions that enhance maintenance of the virus in nature and its transmission to humans must be better understood so adequate control measures can be developed. - Mod.UBAMaps of Senegal can be seen at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/senegal.pdf> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/23318>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
