WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update - 294 (based on data up to up to 9 Jul 2017)-------------------------------------------------------------Summary-------In the temperate zone of the southern hemisphere, high levels of influenza activity continued to be reported. A few countries in Central America, the Caribbean, and South East Asia also reported increased influenza activity. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere was reported at low levels. Worldwide, influenza A(H3N2) and B viruses co-circulated.- In the temperate zone of the southern hemisphere, influenza activity increased or peaked in most countries in recent weeks.- In temperate South America, influenza activity remained high but appeared to have peaked in most of the countries. In Uruguay, severe acute respiratory infection and influenza activities continued to increase. Influenza A(H3N2) viruses predominated in the region with some B virus activity reported as well.- In Oceania, seasonal influenza activity continued to increase, with influenza A(H3N2) and B viruses present in the region. In Australia, influenza activity was following the seasonal pattern. An increasing trend of ILI and SARI activities was reported in New Zealand in recent weeks, with influenza like illness (ILI) remaining just above the seasonal threshold level. Influenza activity also increased with influenza A(H3N2) and B Yamagata lineage viruses predominantly detected. Other respiratory virus activity remained stable.- In Southern Africa, seasonal activity continued to increase with influenza A(H3N2) being the most detected subtype followed by A(H1N1)pdm09.- In the Caribbean, respiratory virus activity remained low in most countries with the exception of Cuba reporting an increase of influenza A(H3N2) viruses and RSV detections in recent weeks. In Central America, influenza activity continued to increase in El Salvador and Honduras, and in Costa Rica and Nicaragua with influenza A(H3N2) and B viruses detected, respectively. Increasing trends of acute respiratory infections (ARI), SARI and pneumonia were reported in El Salvador as well.- In tropical South America, influenza activity remained low.- In Western Africa, few influenza detections were reported in C̫te d'Ivoire, Ghana, Senegal and Togo. In Eastern Africa, influenza activity continued to decrease. In both influenza transmission zones, influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and A(H3N2) viruses co-circulated.- In Southern Asia, low levels of influenza activity continued to be reported, with influenza A(H1N1) virus predominant.- In South East Asia, influenza activity continued to increase in some countries and decreased in other countries. In Singapore, ILI and influenza activity appeared to decrease after peaking in week 20, with influenza A(H3N2) viruses predominant. Increased influenza activity was reported in Thailand, with all seasonal influenza subtypes co-circulating. In the Philippines, influenza detections appeared to decrease with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses predominant. ILI and influenza activity continued to increase in Southern China and to a high level in Hong Kong, SAR, China, with detections of predominantly influenza A(H3N2) viruses. Increased SARI activity was also reported in Hong Kong, SAR, China.- In North America, little to no influenza activity was reported.- In Europe, little to no influenza activity was reported.- In Northern Africa, no influenza virus detections were reported.- In Western Asia, a few influenza virus detections were reported in recent weeks. SARI activity continued to decrease in Armenia and Georgia.- In Central Asia, there were no updated reports on virus detections or respiratory illness indicators.- In East Asia, influenza activity remained low. A few detections of influenza A(H3N2) viruses were reported in Northern China and Republic of Korea.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 68 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 26 Jun 2017 to 9 Jul 2017 (data as of 20 Jul 2017 15:26:16 UTC).The WHO GISRS [Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System]laboratories tested more than 50 673 specimens during that time period. 6764 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 5983 (88.5 percent) were typed as influenza A and 781 (11.5 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 680 (12.5 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 4762 (87.5 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 177 (58 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 128 (42 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Based on this update, it is clear that there is predominant circulation of influenza A(H3N2) viruses along with nearly equivocal distribution of the influenza B lineages. A surge in severe influenza cases with hospitalization has been reported from Hong Kong which is placing a burden on the healthcare system. - Mod.UBA]******[2] Hong Kong: surge in casesDate: Wed 26 Jul 2017 12:09 PM HKTSource: South China Morning Post [edited]<http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/health-environment/article/2104137/first-group-public-hospital-transfer-patients>On [Wed 26 Jul 2017], 8 patients from Queen Elizabeth Hospital were transferred to the privately run St Teresa's Hospital as part of measures to ease overcrowding at public hospitals during peak flu season. The patients, some on stretchers and wheelchairs, left the hospital in Yau Ma Tei separately in 2 groups in the morning, both sent by non-emergency ambulances, and arrived at St Teresa's in Kowloon City.They came from the orthopaedics, gynaecology, and surgical wards. ""I think the facilities [at St Teresa's] are better,"" a patient, 26, said.The arrangement is part of a plan to share the burden of public hospitals, which have had an influx of inpatients during the summer flu peak period. Other measures include asking doctors serving the Department of Health to work part-time at public hospitals and adding 8000 places at public outpatient clinics by September [2017].Latest statistics from the department showed 372 severe flu cases, including 249 deaths, had been recorded since May [2017].In total 48 beds have been made available in St Teresa's until the end of September [2017] for public hospital patients, who would be eligible for transfer if they were in stable condition when recovering from surgery.Queen Elizabeth, the 1st public hospital to send patients to a private institution under the scheme, had a bed occupancy rate of 117 percent in its medical ward on [Tue 25 Jul 2017], higher than the overall rate of 109 per cent.Signs at its accident and emergency ward in the morning showed that non-urgent patients had to wait over 2 hours to be treated. The supply of beds at the medical ward remained ""tight"", with patients needing to wait over 5 hours to be admitted.[Byline: Elizabeth Cheung, Brian Wong]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[In the previous ProMED post dated 19 Jul 2017 (20170719.5184913), influenza A/H3N2 was reported to be causing the majority of seasonal influenza cases. From this report, it seems that the percentage of severe cases with a fatal outcome is quite high (66.9 percent) and merits further investigation.The WHO update on seasonal influenza above also states ""ILI and influenza activity continued to increase in Southern China and to a high level in Hong Kong, SAR, China, with detection of predominantly influenza A(H3N2) viruses. Increased SARI activity was also reported in Hong Kong, SAR, China.""Public education on protective measures from seasonal influenza could help in preventing the spread of influenza in the community - Mod.UBA]
