Nunatsiaq Online [edited]<http://www.nunatsiaqonline.ca/stories/article/65674public_health_confirms_source_of_botulism_linked_to_nunavik_death/>Nunavik [Quebec] health officials have confirmed that beluga [whale] meat consumed in Inukjuak earlier in July 2017 was infected with the bacterium that causes botulism. Botulism is believed to have killed an Inukjuak woman in her 50s on 8 Jul 2017 and affected the woman's daughter, who was treated in Montreal hospital and later released. Botulism is a rare but serious illness caused by a toxin that affects the nervous system and can cause paralysis and in serious cases, death.""We had a call from the health centre that morning, and the doctor on call had spoken to family members to understand what had happened,"" said Dr Marie Rochette, coordinator of infectious disease prevention at Nunavik's public health department.Health care workers identified beluga meat, which was sent to Ottawa for testing and came back positive for _Clostridium botulinum_, the bacterium that causes botulism. Officials are still waiting on the results of 2 other samples of beluga meat. The health centre in Inukjuak reported treating other patients with symptoms of botulism, although it remains unclear if those patients ate the same beluga meat and no other cases were confirmed.The meat in question came from belugas hunted near Umiujaq at the end of June 2017, Rochette said, when temperatures along the Hudson Bay coast rose as high as 28 deg C [82.4 deg F]. ""Warm temperatures can be the cause of the [bacterial growth],"" Rochette said. Public health issued a warning to Inukjuamiut and anyone else who had beluga meat, fat, or oil from that harvest to throw out the products. The affected meat appeared to be limited to the whale's inside flesh, however; a number of people ate maqtaq [also called muktuk, it is a traditional Inuit/Eskimo meal of frozen whale skin and blubber - Mod.LL] and didn't fall ill, Rochette said.Despite the tragic death of the Inukjuak woman, cases of botulism remain rare in the region. Over the last decade, Nunavik has seen anywhere between zero and 3 cases of foodborne botulism a year, with no other recent deaths. ""But with warming temperatures, these are conditions for the bacteria to grow,"" Rochette said. ""That's why we are warning hunters to be very careful to put [harvested] meat on ice or in a cooler right away.""Symptoms of botulism can include:- fatigue, weakness and dizziness;- blurred or double vision;- dryness in the mouth, throat and nose and difficulty in swallowing and speaking;- headache;- nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and, less commonly, diarrhea; and- paralysis that starts in the shoulders and arms and moves down the body.Symptoms of foodborne botulism generally begin 12 to 36 hours after consuming contaminated food, but onset can begin as soon as 6 hours after exposure or as long as 10 days later. Rochette urges any Nunavimmiut who experiences those symptoms to go to their local health centre immediately.[Byline: Sarah Rogers]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The exact number of potential botulism cases referred to is not stated.The following publication summarizes 2 decades of botulism in Canada, a great majority occurring due to type E in the native population, associated with ingestion of food products from marine sources:Leclair D, Fung J, Isaac-Renton JL, et al. Foodborne botulism in Canada, 1985-2005. Emerg Infect Dis. 2013; 19(6): 961-8; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3713816/>.Abstract--------During 1985-2005, a total of 91 laboratory-confirmed outbreaks of foodborne botulism occurred in Canada; these outbreaks involved 205 cases and 11 deaths. Of the outbreaks, 75 (86.2 percent) were caused by _Clostridium botulinum_ type E, followed by types A (7/8.1 percent) and B (5/5.7 percent). Approximately 85 percent of the outbreaks occurred in Alaska Native communities, particularly the Inuit of Nunavik in northern Quebec and the First Nations population of the Pacific coast of British Columbia. These populations were predominantly exposed to type E botulinum toxin through the consumption of traditionally prepared marine mammal and fish products. 2 botulism outbreaks were attributed to commercial ready-to-eat meat products and 3 to foods served in restaurants; several cases were attributed to non-Native home-prepared foods. A total of 3 affected pregnant women delivered healthy infants. Improvements in botulism case identification and early treatment have resulted in a reduction in the case-fatality rate in Canada.The following was abstracted from a 2001 CDC report on foodborne botulism in the native American population in Alaska and underscores changes in the fermentation techniques which appear to have increased the risks of this intoxication (<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5032a2.htm>):This report illustrates how the use of nontraditional fermentation methods is associated with foodborne botulism in Alaska. Botulism results from eating preformed toxin produced by _Clostridium botulinum_. Botulism intoxication can result in death, which most often is caused by respiratory failure. The latent period is typically 12-36 hours but can range from 6 hours to 10 days (1). _C. botulinum_ and closely related organisms produce toxins designated as types A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. Human botulism is most commonly caused by types A, B, and E. Type E is associated with foods of marine or freshwater origin. Alaska's foodborne botulism rates exceed those in any other state and are among the highest in the world (1). During 1950-2000, Alaska recorded 226 cases of foodborne botulism from 114 outbreaks. All patients were Alaska Natives, and all cases with known causes were associated with eating fermented foods (1,2). Approximately 27 percent of US foodborne botulism cases occur in Alaska.In traditional fermentation, food is kept in a grass-lined hole in the ground or a wooden barrel sunken into the ground or is placed in a shady area above ground for several weeks to months. Since the 1970s, however, plastic or glass containers have been used and fermentation has been done above ground or indoors. The anaerobic condition of sealed containers and warmer temperatures make fermentation more rapid and production of botulism toxin more likely (3-5). These nontraditional methods have been associated with increased botulism rates in Alaska during 1970-1989 (4,5). Although a plastic container was not used in this outbreak, the beaver tail and paw were fermented in a closed rice sack and stored in a warm area.Early diagnosis and antitoxin treatment have contributed to the decline of the case fatality rate from approximately 31 percent during 1950-1959 to no deaths in Alaska since 1994 (1). However, Alaska continues to have high foodborne botulism rates because fermented foods are part of Alaska Native culture. In a 1999 survey, 107 (77 percent) of 140 Alaska Natives reported having eaten fermented foods at least once in their lifetime (3).References----------1. Beller M. Botulism in Alaska: a guide for physicians and health-care providers -- 1998 update. Anchorage, Alaska: Alaska Department of Health and Social Services, 1998.2. Wainwright RB, Heyward WL, Middaugh JP, et al. Food-borne botulism in Alaska, 1947-1985: epidemiology and clinical findings. J Infect Dis. 1988; 157: 1158-62.3. Chiou L, Hennessy T, Horn A, et al. A survey of knowledge, attitudes, and practices related to fermented foods known to cause botulism among Alaska Natives of southwest Alaska. [Abstract]. Presented at the 2nd International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases, Atlanta, Georgia, July 2000.4. Eisenberg MS, Bender TR. Plastic bags and botulism: a new twist to an old hazard of the north. Alaska Med 1976; July: 47-9.5. Shaffer N, Wainwright RB, Middaugh JP. Botulism among Alaska Natives: the role of changing food preparation and consumption practices. West J Med. 1990;153: 390-3.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/36053>.]
