YoVizag [edited]<https://www.yovizag.com/uddanam-mystery-kidney-disease/>It's been more than 2 decades, and the Uddanam kidney disease remains a mystery. The cause of Uddanam nephropathy as it is called is still unknown. Actor and Jana Sena party chief Pawan Kalyan is himself a champion and fighter for the cause. He was the one to receive the team of scientists from Harvard who have come to Srikakulam. This is a return visit, and their research continues for a solution. They will collect samples, conduct tests, and submit their findings.Uddanam, a small village tucked into the greens of Srikakulam, is the site for a killing rampage. Uddanam nephropathy is a chronic kidney disease endemic to the place and affecting Sompeta, Kaviti, Mandasa, Icchapuram, etc. in Srikakulam district. The symptoms of the disease are:- High blood pressure- Urea deposits in kidney- Potassium accumulation in blood- Red blood cells depleted, causing anemia- Gross imbalance in body fluidsStatistics:- As of 2016, 3200 have lost their lives to the mystery disease.- One in each family in Srikakulam is prey to the disease, as per numbers.- Higher chances of disease attacking the age group of 30-40 years.- More males prone to the disease than females.- The most affected are cashew nut, rice and coconut farmers in the region.Recently, the Harvard team has come again to continue research and submit findings on the disease.Andhra Medical College hosted the Uddanam Kidney Diseases Research Team along with the Health ministry and medical experts.A total of 100 000 people have been tested, and almost 26% have been detected with the disease. Out of this, 80 percent are suffering from moderate symptoms that can be cured through medical aid.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There are numerous articles about this malady on the internet. It also appears to be occurring in other countries, and information about it can be found in the archives of ProMED-mail (see alsos below).According to: <http://www.thenewsminute.com/article/uddanam-nephropathy-what-andhras-mysterious-kidney-disease-55228>: ""Symptoms included hypertension and diabetes, followed by a long asymptomatic period, and later diagnosed with excess proteins in the urine, decreased red blood cell count, and high levels of uric acid in the blood.""The phenomenon was discussed and termed Uddanam nephropathy at the 2013 International Congress of Nephrology held in Hong Kong.""Although the association of specific occupations with endemic nephropathy has highlighted the issue of environmental toxins and heat stress, the exact cause of Uddanam nephropathy is still an enigma,"" writes Anirban Ganguli of Georgetown University in the May 2016 issue of the American Journal of Kidney Disease:""While chemical analyses of cultivated rice or drinking water from the endemic region have been negative, the concern of environmental pollution with organo-chemical pesticides and heavy metals remains, because this was not assessed in these studies,"" he adds.In 2011, a group of researchers studied the drinking water sources of these villages, and ""the presence of phenols and mercury in drinking water was found to be very high. ... Phenols and mercury, being very toxic in their characteristic nature, are bio-accumulative. Hence, these waters are found not suitable for potable purposes.""Researchers initially pinpointed ""excessive levels of silica in water"" as the cause after a preliminary round of examination.""According to the World Health Organization, this is one of the 3 regions in the world with the highest concentration of chronic kidney diseases (CKD) after Sri Lanka and Nicaragua.""This disease has also been theorized to involve massive dehydration in these individuals. In several regions, there has been heavy metal testing, pesticide testing, and general toxicology screening, but thus far, there are a variety of concentrations of a variety of toxins. However, even taken in total, there does not seem to be enough to be called the actual cause of this disease. I think there have been some examinations of looking at the multiple things found in drinking waters of these various locations, as well as dehydration, but a consensus of the cause has not yet been determined.In the meantime, this is a scary and sad situation for the families involved. Men are more prone to it, as well as those who are more likely to be agricultural workers, and they are the primary providers for their families. Fathers and sons in the same family have worked in the same conditions and been equally affected. If this disease were not spread over such a large region and multiple countries one might wonder whether there is a genetic link. The vast regions of this condition may negate that theory, or their genetic link is thousands of years old and has not been discovered.We hope the researchers will quickly find the cause, treatment, and cure for this horrible situation. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/142>.]
