Diario de Cuba [in Spanish, trans. KS, edited]<http://www.diariodecuba.com/cuba/1500997291_32801.html>The Ministry of Public Health (MINSAP) announced that it has registered cases of conjunctivitis in the provinces of Havana, Guantanamo, Santiago de Cuba, Holguin, Granma and Las Tunas in statements by Dr. Francisco DuråÁn, national director of Epidemiology, released by the official Cuban News Agency (ACN).The news, which appeared in the official press after independent media had reported the outbreak, summarized the situation: ""Since 2016, there is an outbreak of epidemic hemorrhagic conjunctivitis in countries of this region of the Americas, mainly in Haiti and the Dominican Republic"" and measures have been taken by Cuban authorities ""to prevent its spread"".DuråÁn explained to the ACN that ""this viral disease affects all ages and is epidemic because it is highly transmissible through interpersonal contact with and microdroplets of saliva from an infected person."" The specialist emphasized the importance of the care that the population should take in the summer, ""especially if you take into account that this virus also spreads through ocular secretions that can remain on tables, counters, buses, and personal objects or in the environment "".The official insisted on ""reinforcing measures, including hand washing, as well as eliminating flies and cockroaches, insects that can also transmit the disease."" He said that swimming pools - not well chlorinated - and places with high concentrations of people are highly vulnerable to spreading infection.The epidemiologist noted that people experiencing ""eye irritation, tearing, sensitivity to light, eyelid edema, redness of the eyes and general malaise should be examined by a physician."" According to the specialist, ""for the treatment of this condition, within in the first 5 days of development, do not apply eye drops or drugs used in other types of conjunctivitis, only cold compresses.""An unofficial source had indicated that the number of diagnoses of conjunctivitis in Guantanamo had exceeded 700 by early July [2017]. While we were preparing this report, we learned cases of viral conjunctivitis had also been reported in Santiago de Cuba and La Habana.DuråÁn said that ""in the last 6 years there have been no cases of epidemiological hemorrhagic conjunctivitis in Cuba"" and insisted that ""the countries with the highest incidence are currently Haiti and the Dominican Republic.""Epidemic hemorrhagic conjunctivitis was first identified in Ghana in 1969 and was unknown in Cuba until August 1981, the ACN notes. It is more frequent in coastal areas of tropical countries with high temperatures and humidity and its incidence is greater during the rainy season. In this region of Central America and the Caribbean it primarily appears between the months of September and December, according to specialists.The authorities point out as a possible cause of this epidemic ""the dust from the Sahara Desert, which spreads to the Caribbean at certain times of the year, and also causes skin irritation and afflictions of the tonsils, mouth, nose and other parts of the body.""--Communicated by:ProMED-ESP <promed@promedmail.org>[Viruses cause up to 80 percent of all cases of acute conjunctivitis, but many cases are misdiagnosed as bacterial conjunctivitis. Between 65 and 90 percent of cases of viral conjunctivitis are caused by adenoviruses. Conjunctivitis may accompany the common cold and other systemic viral infections (especially measles, but also chickenpox, rubella, and mumps). Localized viral conjunctivitis without systemic manifestations usually results from adenoviruses and sometimes enteroviruses.Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis usually results from adenovirus serotypes Ad 5, 8, 11, 13, 19, and 37 and tends to cause severe conjunctivitis. Pharyngoconjunctival fever usually results from serotypes Ad 3, 4, and 7. Outbreaks of acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, a rare conjunctivitis associated with infection by enterovirus type 70, have occurred in Africa and Asia.Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (AHC) is an epidemic form of highly contagious conjunctivitis and is characterized by sudden onset of painful, swollen, red eyes, with conjunctival hemorrhaging and excessive tearing. Since 1981, when AHC was 1st detected in the Western Hemisphere, 3 major epidemics had occurred until 2003, all affecting the Caribbean. During August to October 2003, a 4th epidemic occurred in Puerto Rico (2000 population: 3.8 million). The Puerto Rico Department of Health (PRDOH) documented an estimated 490 000 persons with illness, including over 51 000 cases reported by physicians; demonstrated laboratory evidence of Coxsackievirus A24 (CA24); and determined that school-aged children (i.e., aged 5 to 18 years) and those living in crowded urban areas were at highest risk.Lymphadenopathy is observed in up to 50 percent of viral conjunctivitis cases and is more prevalent in viral conjunctivitis compared with bacterial conjunctivitis. Herpes simplex virus comprises 1.3 to 4.8 percent of all cases of acute conjunctivitis. Conjunctivitis caused by the virus is usually unilateral. The discharge is thin and watery, and accompanying vesicular eyelid lesions may be present.See references below for full articles:1. <http://www.merckmanuals.com>.2. Alonso-Echanove J, GarcÌ a-Guadalupe Y, RullÌÁn J, Pallansch MA, Alvarado-Ramy F and Cauthen B. Acute Hemorrhagic Conjunctivitis Outbreak Caused by Coxsackievirus A24 - Puerto Rico, 2003. MMWR 2004;53(28): 632-634. Available at:<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5328a2.htm>.3. Azari AA and Barney NP. Conjunctivitis: Conjunctivitis: a systematic review of diagnosis and treatment. JAMA 2013;310(16): 1721-1729. Available at:<http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/1758756>.A Healthmap / ProMED map of Cuba can be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/20>. - Mod.LK]
