Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/ohio-reports-11-human-h3n2v-influenza-cases-last-week-17178/>In recent weeks, Ohio county fairs reported swine H3N2, prompting closure of the pig exhibitions. According to a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) FluView published today [28 Jul 2017], 11 human infections with novel influenza A viruses were detected in Ohio during the week of 16 Jul 2017.All 11 persons were infected with influenza A (H3N2) variant (H3N2v) viruses and reported exposure to swine in a fair setting during the week preceding illness onset. Ten of the 11 patients were children less than 18 years of age, and one patient was an adult aged 50-64 years. None were hospitalized, and all have fully recovered from their illness.No human-to-human transmission has been identified. Swine influenza A (H3N2) viruses were identified from respiratory samples collected from pigs at the same fair.Public health and agriculture officials are investigating the extent of disease among humans and swine, but no increases in influenza-like illness in the community have been reported. These 11 infections bring the total number of H3N2v infections during 2017 to 12 and the cumulative total since 2011 to 376.Swine influenza is a respiratory disease of pigs caused by type A influenza viruses that cause outbreaks in pigs. Signs of swine flu in pigs can include fever, coughing (barking), sneezing, breathing difficulties, eye redness or inflammation, and not eating. Some pigs infected with influenza, however, may show no signs of illness at all.Swine flu viruses do not normally infect people; however, sporadic human infections with these viruses have occurred. Human infections with H1N1v, H3N2v and H1N2v viruses have been detected in the United States.Spread between pigs and people is thought to happen mainly when an infected pig (or human) coughs or sneezes, and droplets with influenza virus in them spread through the air. If these droplets land in the nose or mouth, or are inhaled, that person (or pig) could be infected.There also is some evidence that the virus might spread through touching something that has virus on it and then touching the mouth or nose.A 3rd way to possibly get infected is to inhale particles containing influenza virus. Influenza has not been shown to be transmissible to people through eating properly handled and prepared pork (pig meat) or other products derived from pigs.Most commonly, human infections with variant viruses occur in people with exposure to infected pigs (e.g., at a fair or at work). Illness associated with variant virus infection includes symptoms similar to those of seasonal flu. Most illness has been mild, but as with seasonal flu, hospitalization and death can occur. There have been documented cases of multiple people becoming sick after exposure to one or more infected pigs and also cases of limited spread of variant influenza viruses from person to person.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[As a background to this report, a case of H3N2 swine flu was lab confirmed in one hog at the Clinton County Fair in early July 2017, but there were no human cases at that time. Later, 2 hogs at the Franklin County Fair (Columbus, Ohio) tested positive for swine H1N1, and that exhibit was also closed <http://afludiary.blogspot.com/2017/07/second-ohio-county-fair-closes-hog-barn.html>.Influenza A viruses circulating in swine that have infected humans are referred to as ""variant"" viruses and are denoted with a letter ""v."" Human infections with H1N1v, H3N2v and H1N2v viruses have been detected in the United States.Most commonly, human infections with variant viruses occur in people with exposure to infected swine (e.g. children near swine at a fair or workers in the swine industry). There have been documented cases of multiple people becoming sick after exposure to one or more infected swine and also rare cases of limited spread of variant influenza viruses from person-to-person. The vast majority of human infections with variant influenza viruses do not result in person-to-person spread. However, each human infection with a swine influenza virus should be fully investigated to be sure that such viruses are not spreading in an efficient and ongoing way in humans and, if infected animals are identified, to limit further exposure of humans to these animals.During the summer of 2012, the largest outbreak of influenza A/H3N2 was reported, with 10 states reporting over 300 confirmed cases, nearly all linked to county or state fair attendance [<https://www.cdc.gov/flu/spotlights/h3n2v-new-cases.htm>]. The state of Indiana reported the most cases (n=138), followed by Ohio (n=106) <https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6138a3.htm>. While the H3N2v virus was the most commonly reported strain, H1N1v and H1N2v were also detected. While most of these infections were mild, 16 people were hospitalized and one died <https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6138a3.htm>.In August 2016, there were reports of 18 fair attendees who were diagnosed with a swine variant (H3N2v) influenza virus in 2 states; Michigan and Ohio, over a period of several weeks [<https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/>]. It was reported that 16 of the 18 cases analyzed belonged to a new genotype not previously detected in humans.Clinical Presentation and Risk Groups-----------------------------Clinical characteristics of human infections with variant viruses generally have been similar to signs and symptoms of uncomplicated seasonal influenza, including fever, cough, pharyngitis, rhinorrhea, myalgia, and headache. Vomiting and diarrhea also have been reported in some infections in children. Milder clinical illness is possible, including lack of fever. The duration of illness appears to be similar to uncomplicated seasonal influenza, approximately 3 to 5 days. While assumed to be similar to seasonal influenza virus infection, the duration of viral replication and possible infectiousness of variant virus infection has not been studied.Clinical Diagnosis---------------Variant virus infection cannot be distinguished by clinical features from seasonal influenza virus infection, or from infection with other respiratory viruses that can cause influenza-like illness (fever and either cough or sore throat). Therefore, the key to suspecting variant virus infection in an ill patient is to elicit an epidemiological link to recent swine exposure in the week prior to illness onset. Exposure can be defined as follows:- Direct contact with swine (e.g., showing swine, raising swine, feeding swine, or cleaning swine waste)- Indirect exposure to swine (e.g., visiting a swine farm or walking through a swine barn), especially if swine were known to be ill; or- Close contact (within 2 meters or approximately 6 feet) with an ill person who had recent swine exposure or is known to be infected with a variant virus.For any ill person with an exposure as defined above, respiratory samples should be taken for testing. Clinicians should obtain a nasopharyngeal swab or aspirate (or a combined nasal swab and throat swab), place the swab or aspirate (or combined specimen) into viral transport medium, and contact their state or local health department to arrange transport and request a timely diagnosis at a state public health laboratory. Only CDC and state public health laboratories can confirm variant virus infections. As per the CDC weekly Flu View report (week ending 30 Jul 2017: "" Eleven human infections with novel influenza A viruses were detected in Ohio during week 29. All 11 persons were infected with influenza A (H3N2) variant (H3N2v) viruses and reported exposure to swine in a fair setting during the week preceding illness onset. Ten of the 11 patients were children less than 18 years of age and one patient was an adult aged 50-64 years. None were hospitalized and all have fully recovered from their illness. No human-to-human transmission has been identified. Swine influenza A (H3N2) viruses were identified from respiratory samples collected from pigs at the same fair. Public health and agriculture officials are investigating the extent of disease among humans and swine, but no increases in influenza-like illness in the community have been reported. These 11 infections bring the total number of H3N2v infections during 2017 to 12 and the cumulative total since 2011 to 376.""It's is important to ensure early identification and investigation of human infections with novel influenza A viruses to ensure timely risk assessment and so that appropriate public health measures can be taken. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/237>.]
