Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (CDC) [edited, translated by rapporteur AH]<http://www.cdc.gov.tw/english/info.aspx?treeid=BC2D4E89B154059B&nowtreeid=EE0A2987CFBA3222&tid=4081EA4DB0E744E7>Meningococcal meningitis cluster occurred at military base brought under control. On 26 Jul 2017, the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (Taiwan CDC) announced one cluster of 3 reported meningococcal meningitis cases at a military base. 2 cases tested positive for _Neisseria meningitidis_ and one died. The test result of the other case is pending. All contacts have been evaluated by a physician and given prophylaxis. All of them have been asked to monitor their own health. As of now, no new suspected cases have been reported and the outbreak has been brought under control.On 23 Jul 2017, Taiwan CDC was notified of a suspected meningococcal meningitis case. The case was an active duty soldier at a military base in northern Taiwan. On 22 Jul 2017, when he developed symptoms, he sought immediate medical attention; the following morning, he died. On 23 Jul 2017, another hospital diagnosed the 2nd suspected case of meningococcal meningitis at the same military base. To prevent further transmission, the local health authority conducted an expanded epidemiological investigation and implemented a number of prevention measures, which identified the third suspected case, which was reported to the health authority on 24 Jul 2017. Currently, the 2 cases are stable and being treated. A total of 191 contacts, including military servicemen, family members residing in the same households, and healthcare workers, have been identified. After the physician evaluation, 118 contacts were given prophylaxis. The local health authority provided the contacts with relevant health education and asked them to monitor their own health till 12 Aug 2017.According to the surveillance data compiled by Taiwan CDC, thus far this year [2017], a total of 8 meningococcal meningitis cases, including 1 death, have been confirmed.Meningococcal meningitis is an acute infectious disease caused by meningococcus. The disease is transmitted from person-to-person through droplets of respiratory or throat secretions from carriers. The incubation period ranges from 2 to 10 days. The symptoms include fever, severe headache, nausea, vomiting, neck stiffness, hemorrhagic rash, pink spots, confusion or other mental changes, coma, and seizure. When necessary, antibiotics are prescribed as the treatment. [Prompt initiation of antibiotic therapy is always necessary. Before antibiotics were available, the case fatality ratio [CFR] for invasive meningococcal disease was between 70 and 85 per cent. With use of antibiotics, the CFR now is 10-15 per cent, although meningococcemia is fatal in up to 40 per cent of patients (<https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt08-mening.html>). - Mod.ML]To ward off meningococcal meningitis, wash hands with soap and water frequently, maintain good indoor ventilation, avoid staying in poorly ventilated rooms for long hours, and seek prompt medical attention when suspected symptoms developed. Physicians are advised to be vigilant for suspected cases and prescribe antibiotics when appropriate. Travelers planning to visit areas affected by meningococcal meningitis are advised to visit the outpatient travel clinic at contracted hospitals in the nation to evaluate the need of meningococcal meningitis vaccination prior to their trip. The public is urged to seek timely medical assistance when suspected symptoms develop and inform the doctor of any recent travel history to facilitate prompt diagnosis and case reporting. For more information, please visit the Taiwan CDC website at <http://www.cdc.gov.tw>; <http://www.cdc.gov.tw/rwd/english> or call the toll-free Communicable Disease Reporting and Consultation Hotline, 1922 (or 0800-001922).--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Close and prolonged contact (such as kissing, sneezing, and coughing on someone), living in close quarters or dormitories (military recruits, students), sharing eating or drinking utensils, etc, facilitates the spread of the disease. Close contacts of patients who have meningococcal disease are at great risk for developing meningococcal disease; the risk of secondary disease among close contacts is greatest during the first few days after the onset of disease. Spread of infection to household members and others who were directly exposed to an infected patient's oral secretions (for example, kissing, mouth-to-mouth resuscitation) is prevented by the administration to these close contacts of antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis (rifampin x 2 days, or ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone, or azithromycin x a single dose), as soon as possible.The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advises meningococcal vaccination of the population at risk if the primary attack rate (that is, cases without known close contact with another patient with meningococcal disease) is greater than 10 cases per 100 000 population at risk. The choice of vaccine will depend on knowing the serogroup of the outbreak strain, because the quadrivalent (ACYW) meningococcal vaccine will cover serogroups A, C, Y, and W, and the serogroup B vaccine will cover only serogroup B, without cross-coverage. However, the news report above fails to provide the serogroup of the outbreak strain.Maps of Taiwan can be seen at <http://www.mapsofworld.com/taiwan/taiwan-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/193>. - Mod.ML]
