PAHO/WHO Epidemiological update yellow fever [edited]<http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=41102&lang=en>Situation summary in the Americas---------------------------------From epidemiological week (EW) 1 of 2016 to EW 30 of 2017, Brazil, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Suriname have reported suspected and confirmed yellow fever cases (figure 1: see URL above).Since the last yellow fever epidemiological update published by the Pan American Health Organization, Regional Office of the World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO), only Bolivia has reported cases and no changes in the number of reported cases have been reported in the other countries.In Bolivia, between EW 3 and EW 30 of 2017, a total of 5 yellow fever cases were confirmed, including 3 deaths (case fatality rate 60 per cent) (figure 2: see URL above). None of the cases had been vaccinated and all were infected in known areas with risk of yellow fever transmission in the departments of La Paz (4 cases) and Cochabamba (1 case). The age range of the cases is between 9 and 48 years and the majority (80 per cent) are male.RecommendationsPAHO/WHO urges member states to continue efforts to immunize at risk populations and take the necessary actions to keep travelers informed and vaccinated, when heading to areas where yellow fever vaccination is recommended.VaccinationThe yellow fever vaccine is safe and affordable and provides effective immunity against the disease in the range of 80 to 100 per cent of those vaccinated after 10 days and 99 per cent immunity after 30 days. A single dose provides life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine is not needed.Given the limitations on the availability of vaccines and with the aim of promoting the rational use, PAHO / WHO reiterates its recommendations to national authorities:1. Conduct an assessment of vaccination coverage against yellow fever in areas at risk at the municipal level to guarantee at least 95 per cent coverage among the resident population of these areas.2. Member states that are not currently experiencing outbreaks should not conduct immunization campaign. Priority should be given to the use of vaccines in susceptible populations and to avoid revaccination.3. Ensure vaccination of all travelers to endemic areas at least 10 days before traveling.4. Depending on vaccine availabilities, member states should have a small stock that allows them to respond to outbreaks.5. Postpone routine vaccination in children in non-endemic areas until sufficient vaccines are available. Once there is availability, catch-up campaigns should be conducted to complete vaccination schedules.PrecautionsIt is recommended to individually assess the epidemiological risk of contracting disease when faced with the risk of an adverse event occurring in persons over 60 years who have not been previously vaccinated.- •âá The vaccine can be offered to individuals with asymptomatic HIV infection with CD4+ counts ‰ä´ 200 cells / mm3 requiring vaccination.- •âá Pregnant women should be vaccinated in an emergency situation and following recommendations of health authorities.- •âá Vaccination is recommended in lactating women who live in endemic areas, since the risk of transmitting the vaccine virus to the child is lower than the benefits of the vaccination of breastfeeding women.- •âá For pregnant or lactating women traveling to areas with yellow fever transmission, vaccination is recommended when travel cannot be postponed or avoided. They should receive advice on the potential benefits and risks of vaccination to make an informed decision. The benefits of breastfeeding are superior to those of other nutritional alternatives.The following people are usually excluded from yellow fever vaccination:- immunocompromised individuals (Including those with thymus disorders, symptomatic HIV, malignant neoplasms under treatment, and those that are receiving or have received immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory treatments, recent transplants, and current or recent radiation therapy);- people with severe allergies to eggs and their derivatives.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[With no new cases reported in Brazil the outbreak appears to be over fortunately with no instances of _Aedes aegypti_ urban transmission. However, that risk will continue in Brazil, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Peru so long as the sylvan (forest) transmission cycle is occurring. Persistence of yellow fever virus in endemic sylvan (forest) cycles of transmission in the South American tropical forested countries is reason enough to maintain a high proportion of the population -- at least 80 per cent -- vaccinated in areas of risk. One hopes that efforts to provide vaccine coverage over broad areas of YF virus endemicity can continue to avoid the lapses in coverage the led to the outbreak in Brazil.Individuals planning on traveling to countries where YF is endemic should seek vaccination as soon as possible because there is a vaccine shortage that started in mid to late summer this year (2017) in the USA.A map showing the South American countries mentioned can be accessed at http://www.worldatlas.com/webimage/countrys/samerica/southamericalarge.jpg. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/5>.]
