Scrol.in [edited]<https://scroll.in/pulse/845647/japanese-encephalitis-continues-to-kill-in-assam-despite-immunisation-against-the-virus>Ouguri in Assam's Jorhat district, which is part of the Bhogamukh administrative block, has been at the centre of an acute encephalitis syndrome [AES] outbreak. At least 13 cases have been detected in the last 2 months in the block. In Ouguri revenue circle, 11 villages with a population of slightly more than 10 000, has accounted for almost all of them.Acute encephalitis syndrome is a condition of brain inflammation caused by both bacterial and viral infections [and possibly toxicants]. It is accompanied by fever, headaches, seizures, disorientation and vomiting in people, and if not treated quickly can result in death. The Japanese encephalitis virus [JEV] has been responsible for most cases of acute encephalitis syndrome in India and South Asia [in many instances, JEV infections have comprised a minor part of AES cases. - Mod.TY]The outbreak in Jorhat is part of a larger outbreak in the state. As of [Mon 31 Jul 2017], 1404 people in Assam have been diagnosed with acute encephalitis syndrome in Assam this year [2017], 424 among them have tested positive for Japanese encephalitis. About 119 people have died of acute encephalitis syndrome of which 58 had Japanese encephalitis [virus] infections.In fact, out of the 12 people who were detected to be infected by Japanese encephalitis in Bhogamukh, 11 had been vaccinated. And they are not the only ones. Almost 28 per cent of people in the state who have been infected by Japanese encephalitis had been vaccinated, said Dr Parashee Choudhury, senior medical and health officer at the state's Infectious Disease Surveillance Program. ""There is definitely a problem there too. We need more research to say what exactly is wrong.""Assam is the only state where children in all its districts are being given the Japanese encephalitis vaccine as routine immunisation, which is part of India's universal immunisation program. The state began administering the vaccine to children for the 1st time in 2006 in Sibsagar district, and has since gradually expanded the coverage to other districts. According to state government data, almost 80 per cent of all children under 15 had been vaccinated as of December, 2016.In 2014, Assam also became the 1st state to administer the Japanese encephalitis vaccine to adults. The adult vaccination programme has covered 18 districts as of now, according to state government data reviewed by Scroll.in. However, the exact number of people vaccinated has yet to be compiled.While there is consensus among doctors that the immunisation intervention has been crucial, most acknowledge that there are gaps in the vaccination system. Those who have received vaccinations should not succumb to infections. However, the government's own data over the years confirms that is not the case.Doctors in the region suspect that the cold chain to transport the vaccines to remote areas may have been compromised at some places. ""By the time, the vaccine reaches a remote village in Sibasagar and Jorhat, where there are practically no roads, it is possible that their efficacy decreases because it is difficult to maintain a cold chain for such a long time,"" said a government doctor who did not want to be identified.The doctor added that the vaccine provided immunity only against Japanese encephalitis. She said: ""There are so many other viruses that can be responsible for acute encephalitis syndrome like the West Nile, but more often and then they don't even get detected and we never get to know what actually caused the symptoms.""However, Assam's extensive vaccination drive, doctors and public health experts contend, has at least brought down the case fatality rate in patients suffering from Japanese encephalitis. The death toll from Japanese encephalitis, data suggests, has come down marginally since 2014.Ouguri, which is part of the Bhogamukh administrative block, has been at the centre of an acute encephalitis syndrome outbreak. At least 13 cases have been detected in the last 2 months in the block. The Ouguri revenue circle, with 11 villages and a population of slightly more than 10 000, has accounted for almost all of them.Acute encephalitis syndrome is a condition of brain inflammation caused by both bacterial and viral infections [and possibly toxicants]. It is accompanied by fever, headaches, seizures, disorientation and vomiting in people, and if not treated quickly can result in death. The Japanese encephalitis virus has been responsible for most cases of acute encephalitis syndrome in India and South Asia.There is no specific treatment for Japanese encephalitis, but given the high fatality rate, patients require hospitalisation, supportive care and treatment of symptoms by ensuring rest and administering fluids, pain relievers and medication to reduce fever.While immunisation interventions in the encephalitis endemic districts of Dibrugarh, Jorhat and Sibasagar have helped arrest the spread of the virus to a large extent, most doctors and health workers in the region admit there is a long way to go.The adult vaccination program introduced in 2014, in particular, has suffered many setbacks because of widespread rumours that the Japanese encephalitis vaccine led to impotency. ""This is primarily because there is very little faith in the public health system"", said Suneel Kaul, a public health professional who operates out of rural lower Assam. ""In many tribal areas here, teams that come to administer the vaccine were almost lynched. Any immunisation drive has to be preceded by a lot of communication.""The failure is evident in areas where the outbreak has been severe. For example, the Baghchung administrative block in Jorhat district, has had 20 acute encephalitis syndrome cases, out of which 15 have been Japanese encephalitis. Five people with Japanese encephalitis and one person with acute encephalitis syndrome not caused by the Japanese encephalitis virus have died - all adults who had never been vaccinated.Areas like Sibasagar, Jorhat and Dibrugarh are vulnerable to Japanese encephalitis due to their geography. ""Just look around the area,"" said Baruah. ""There are all these wetlands, plus so many people breed pigs. And then there are egrets everywhere. The whole area is like a heaven for mosquitoes to breed. No vaccination drive can offset all of these factors."" Pigs and wild water birds like egrets, which abound in upper Assam, are known to act as hosts to the culex mosquito - the vector that transmits the Japanese encephalitis virus to humans. But while, the animals and birds are hosts for the mosquitoes, stagnant water helps them breed.With geographical peculiarities working against the local population, there is very little in terms of a 2nd line of defense when the vaccination fails to immunise people. Assam's health infrastructure in remote areas is almost non-existent. Disease surveillance can help pre-empt outbreaks but the state surveillance system [what does it consist of] is also not adequate, claim public health professionals. ""The entire surveillance system has been weak for a while now,"" said a person with an international health non-profit organisation that works closely with the Assam government. ""So, irrespective of vaccination programs, cases of JE will keep emerging from time to time.""Choudhury of the Infectious Disease Surveillance Program countered claims of the encephalitis surveillance program being not sturdy enough, even as she admitted that the programme did not have enough manpower. ""Every district reports each case of JE to the National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme office in Guwahati,"" she explained. ""And if there is a new case in any area with no history, our people go there immediately, collect blood samples, and are always on alert.""Meanwhile, community health workers have alleged that the government has been complacent about mosquito control measures because the outbreak in 2016 was less severe than the preceding years. In both Baghchung and Bhogamukh -- the most severely affected areas in Jorhat -- the government did not spray mosquito repellents. Such spraying or fogging is important in areas prone to mosquitoborne infections. ""Whatever [fogging] has happened has happened after people started dying,"" claimed a health worker. ""By then, the damage was already done. There seems to be a shortage of even DDT this year [2017]."" Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane or DDT is still used as to control mosquitoes in many parts of the country.[byline: Arunabh Saikia]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Although there are many cases of acue encephalitis syndrome (AES) without an etiological diagnosis, clearly there are many cases of Japanese encephalitis (JE) occurring in these areas in Assam state. The reason or reasons for the lack of protection from the vaccine is not clear. The type of vaccine, inactivated or live attenuated, is not stated. Certainly, difficulty in maintaining a cold chain could be an important factor, especially for a live vaccine. The duration of an inactivated vaccine is likely to be relatively short, and require annual boosters. The affected areas in Assam have all the conditions favorable fot JE virus transmission: ardeid birds (herons and their relatives) as reservoirs, pigs as amplifying hosts and wetlands suitable for breeding of culex vector mosquitoes. Vector control over wide-spread wetlands is very difficult and expensive. Use of insecticides over long periods of time is likely to result in resistant mosquito populations.Maps of India can be accessed at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm>. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of India can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/306>. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Assam state, India can be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/299>. - Mod.TY]
