Times of Malta, Reuters report [edited] <https://www.timesofmalta.com/articles/view/20170804/world/aldi-stops-selling-eggs-in-germany-over-food-safety-scare.654886#>Discount supermarket chain Aldi is withdrawing all eggs from sale at its more than 4000 stores in Germany as a precaution, it said today [Fri 4 Aug 2017], as a scare over the possible contamination of eggs with insecticide has spread. Traces of insecticide fipronil were found in eggs in Belgium and the Netherlands last month [July 2017], which has led to the temporary shut-down of some poultry farms and to supermarkets halting the sale of eggs from the Netherlands.Fipronil is considered by the World Health Organization to be moderately toxic, with high doses leading to feelings of nausea and dizziness. Very large quantities can cause damage to the kidneys, liver and lymph glands.Investigators suspect the chemical may have gotten into eggs through a contaminated detergent against mites called Dega 16 that is used to clean barns, and criminal investigations have been launched in both Belgium and the Netherlands. The Netherlands is the world's second-largest agricultural exporter after the United States and sells around 5 billion eggs a year to Germany. The detergent was also supplied to farms in the northern German state of Lower Saxony, from where eggs were distributed across the country, Lower Saxony's agriculture ministry said.Dutch food safety watchdog NVWA said this week only a limited type of egg, recognizable by specific serial numbers, posed a risk. Nonetheless, around 180 poultry companies in the Netherlands have been temporarily closed, and some firms have culled their flocks.A number of supermarket chains including Germany's REWE and Penny have taken Dutch eggs off their shelves. Aldi is the 1st major retailer to stop the sale of eggs altogether, regardless of origin. ""This is merely a precaution, there is no reason to assume there are any health risks,"" Aldi North and Aldi South, the 2 operators of Aldi stores, said in a joint statement on [Fri 4 Aug 2017]. Aldi South's 190 stores in Switzerland have stopped the sale of imported eggs, Aldi Suisse said in a separate statement.The Dutch organisation of food retailers CBL said today [Fri 4 Aug 2017] that all possibly contaminated eggs would be removed from the shelves of supermarkets in the Netherlands. Albert Heijn, the country's largest supermarket chain, said it had removed two thirds of the 38 different kinds of eggs it normally sells. The company, part of Ahold Delhaize, said it could not yet estimate the cost of the move.Public prosecutors in Belgium and the Netherlands are investigating poultry service providers that are suspected of having added Dega 16 to their products, the European Commission said, without providing further details. ""It is for the national public prosecutors to take these cases forward,"" it said.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Fri 4 Aug 2017Source: EurActiv, Agence France-Presse (AFP) [edited]<http://www.euractiv.com/section/agriculture-food/news/dutch-and-germans-massively-get-rid-of-contaminated-eggs/>Supermarkets in the Netherlands and Germany massively withdrew batches of eggs from their shelves on [Thu 3 Aug 2017] amid fears that they contained high quantities of fipronil, a toxic insecticide that is dangerous for humans.The amount of damage is already amounting to ""many millions of euros"" while parliamentarians and farmers blame the Dutch food safety authority for its handling in the case. The Dutch food and product safety board (NVWA) revealed the scandal and raised the alarm this week about eggs that have been contaminated and pose a severe threat to consumers. It stressed that the level of fipronil was ""so high that their consumption represents a serious danger to public health"". It also advised buyers of these eggs ""not to eat them and throw them away"".Fipronil is an insecticide used against lice, ticks and fleas. For the World Health Organization (WHO), fipronil is ""moderately toxic"" but in high concentrations, it could have dangerous effects on kidney, liver and thyroid gland function. Manufactured by Germany's BASF among other companies, fipronil is commonly used in veterinary products to get rid of fleas, lice and ticks. But it is banned from being used to treat animals destined for human consumption, such as chickens.Amid fears, the Dutch poultry industry could be facing millions of euros in losses, the country's biggest supermarket chain Albert Heijn said it was pulling 14 types of eggs from its shelves. ""All the eggs of these 14 kinds have been sent back to the depot and destroyed,"" company spokeswoman Els van Dijk told AFP.It was ""an unprecedented"" situation for Albert Heijn, she added, saying instructions of the Dutch food authority (NVWA) were being followed. Damage to Dutch poultry farms is already believed to have run into millions of euros, said Hennie de Haan, president of the National Poultry Owners union. The NVWA was due to publish its findings later on [Thu 3 Aug 2017] having closed 180 poultry farms across the Netherlands this week after traces of the insecticide, fipronil, was 1st found in samples taken from eggs, droppings and meat in late July [2017].The European Commission said it had been made aware of the egg issue, and spokeswoman Anna-Kaisa Itkonen told reporters developments were being monitored ""very closely"". ""What I can say is that the farms are identified, the eggs are blocked, the contaminated eggs are traced and withdrawn from the market, and the situation is under control.""It is believed the substance was introduced to poultry farms by a Dutch business, named Chickfriend, which was called in to treat red lice, a nasty parasite in chickens. It said that it used a pesticide it got from a Belgian supplier and now there is an ongoing investigation about whether the Dutch company was aware of the toxic insecticide. On the other hand, the breeders believe that Chickfriend duped them.German agriculture minister Christian Schmidt called a ""crisis teleconference"" on [Thu 3 Aug 2017] with his counterparts in German states where fipronil was also detected in eggs. About one million eggs being transported to Germany were also recalled from the border on [Tue 1 Aug 2017] with The Netherlands, the Dutch food authority NVWA added.Belgium's federal food chain security agency (AFSCA) said it too has launched an investigation in cooperation with prosecutors. Tests have found fipronil in some eggs but not in quantities that pose a threat to human health. None of the eggs have made it to Belgian supermarket shelves, the Belgian authority said.It is another blow for Dutch poultry farmers, some of who believe they could now be facing bankruptcy after 190 000 ducks were culled in November [2016] due to a highly infectious strain of bird flu. In the meantime, the NVWA has come under fire for its handling of the situation. Press reports in the Netherlands claim that NVWA initially said there was no danger for the public health, and then it issued warning for specific eggs and ended up suggesting no consumption of eggs until the final test results.Dutch lawmakers asked for a debate on the case. ""Consumers and producers should be able to trust that what the NVWA says and does is correct, "" VVD parliamentarian Helma Lodders told Dutch journal Volkskrant. Hugo Bens from farming organisation LTO Nederland, commented, ""The NVWA is not on top of things [...] If they had been quicker to signal that there were problems with Chickfriend, the problem would not have spread as fast as it did.""--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The NVWA, the Dutch Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority, has attributed a considerable portion of its website to the fipronil-in-layers issue, including separate Q&A for consumers, for producers, and for blocked farms. In the Q&A for consumers, available at <https://www.nvwa.nl/onderwerpen/biociden/fipronil-in-eieren/fipronil-vragen-en-antwoorden-consumenten> (in Dutch), the following maximum residue levels (MRL) for fipronil are provided:""The MRL for fipronil, according to EC Regulation No 396/2005, is 0.005 mg/kg for table eggs. Eggs with higher contents are not allowed marketing and should be recalled"". NVWA further states, that ""the maximal daily intake (ADI) of fipronil was, according to EFSA's 2006 requirements, 0.0002 mg/kg bodyweight, which means, for an adult of 60 kg, 0.012 mg fipronil per day and for a child of 15 kg, 0.003 mg fipronil per day"".REGULATION (EC) No 396/2005 on ""MRL's of pesticides in or on food and feed of plant and animal origin"", (Official Journal L 70, 16 Mar 2005) is available at <http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:2005R0396:20080410:EN:PDF>. - Mod.ASThe following information was extracted from Fipronil general fact sheet; National Pesticide Information Center, Oregon State University Extension Services:""Fipronil kills insects when they eat it or come in contact with it. Fipronil works by disrupting the normal function of the central nervous system in insects. Fipronil is more toxic to insects than people and pets because it is more likely to bind to insect nerve endings.""Health effects from a brief exposure to fipronil depend on how someone is exposed to the chemical. Direct, short-term contact with skin can result in slight skin irritation. When individuals have eaten fipronil, reported health effects included sweating, nausea, vomiting, headache, stomach pain, dizziness, weakness, and seizures. Signs and symptoms from a brief exposure to fipronil generally improve and clear up without treatment.""Once in the body, fipronil is found mainly in the fatty tissue, and breaks down into smaller chemicals called metabolites. Fipronil and its metabolites are then removed from the body mostly through the feces and also in the urine.""Studies have been done to find out the possible effects from long-term exposure to fipronil. In one study, scientists fed fipronil to rats for a year and found an increase in seizures and death among test animals. Fipronil was also found to decrease thyroid hormone levels among rats. However, most short-term and long-term studies find that fipronil does not affect the endocrine system, the system responsible for regulating hormones in the body.""In another study, scientists found that long-term exposure to fipronil in the diet can affect the ability of rats to produce offspring. Effects in those rats included: less mating, reduced fertility, smaller litter size, and increased loss of pregnancy. Scientists also found decreased survival and delayed development among offspring.""The additional information below was extracted from Mohamed F, Senarathna L, Percy A, et al. Acute human self-poisoning with the N-phenylpyrazole insecticide fipronil - a GABAA-gated chloride channel blocker. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2004;42(7):955-63. Available at: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1351141/>.""Deliberate self-poisoning with pesticides is a severe public health problem in the Asia Pacific region, where this prospective study of self reported cases in individuals occurred.""The above noted article is published with regard to a study of 7 individual admitted to a hospital, with fipronil ingestion, and one retrospective case of an individual deceased from fipronil poisoning.""Fipronil, a broad spectrum N-phenylpyrazole insecticide that inhibits GABAA-gated chloride channels, has been in use since the mid-1990s. A high affinity for insect compared to mammalian GABA receptors results in lower animal toxicity than other insecticides blocking this channel. To date, only 2 accidental cases of fipronil poisoning in humans have been published.""In all of these cases the individuals were exposed to Fipronil (CAS 120068-37-3, MW 437.16) is a N-phenylpyrazole insecticide with a trifluoromethylsulfonyl moiety.""Our experience with prospectively observed patients suggests that fipronil poisoning is characterized by vomiting, agitation, and seizures, and normally has a favorable outcome. Management should concentrate on supportive care and early treatment of seizures.""Fipronil disappears rapidly from the blood over the first 15-20h. Thereafter, total fipronil concentrations plateau'd due to slow elimination of fipronil and metabolism of sulfone. Use of activated charcoal may increase clearance, but there is not enough human data to state that conclusively"".The levels set by the EC Regulation No 396/2005 seems quite low, but it is always appropriate to err on the side of caution. There are currently no reports of human effects from this exposure to the eggs. Although eggs may be consumed in a number of forms, they may also be part of numerous other foods, such as bakery goods, soups, and noodles to mention a few. However because of the other ingredients, this would also serve to dilute the amount of fipronil an individual may received from other food products containing eggs.Finding the source of the fipronil will be important. Hopefully the source can be found and the situation rectified in short order. A safe food supply is imperative, but putting chicken and duck farmers out of business is potentially detrimental to the continued supply of eggs. - Mod.TGThe HealthMap/ProMED-mail maps can be accessed as follows:The Netherlands: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/104>,Belgium: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/99>,Germany: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/101>.]
