Hong Kong Govt. info page [edited]<http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201708/04/P2017080400686.htm>The Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health is today (4 Aug 2017) monitoring a notification from the National Health and Family Planning Commission that one additional human case of avian influenza A(H7N9) was recorded from 28 Jul to 3 Aug 2017 in Fujian, and strongly urged the public to maintain strict personal, food and environmental hygiene both locally and during travel. The 58-year-old male patient in Fujian was known to have had exposure to a live poultry farm and had onset on 19 Jul 2017.Travellers to the mainland or other affected areas must avoid visiting wet markets, live poultry markets or farms. They should be alert to the presence of backyard poultry when visiting relatives and friends. They should also avoid purchasing live or freshly slaughtered poultry and avoid touching poultry/birds or their droppings. They should strictly observe personal and hand hygiene when visiting any place with live poultry.Travellers returning from affected areas should consult a doctor promptly if symptoms develop and inform the doctor of their travel history for prompt diagnosis and treatment of potential diseases. It is essential to tell the doctor if they have seen any live poultry during travel, which may imply possible exposure to contaminated environments. This will enable the doctor to assess the possibility of avian influenza and arrange necessary investigations and appropriate treatment in a timely manner.While local surveillance, prevention and control measures are in place, the CHP will remain vigilant and work closely with the World Health Organization and relevant health authorities to monitor the latest developments.The CHP's Port Health Office conducts health surveillance measures at all boundary control points. Thermal imaging systems are in place for body temperature checks on inbound travellers. Suspected cases will be immediately referred to public hospitals for follow-up.The display of posters and broadcasting of health messages in departure and arrival halls as health education for travellers is underway. The travel industry and other stakeholders are being regularly updated on the latest information.The public should maintain strict personal, hand, food and environmental hygiene and take heed of the advice below if handling poultry:- Avoid touching poultry, birds, animals or their droppings.- When buying live chickens, do not touch them and their droppings. Do not blow at their bottoms. Wash eggs with detergent if soiled with faecal matter and cook and consume them immediately. - Always wash hands thoroughly with soap and water after handling chickens and eggs.- Eggs should be cooked well until the white and yolk become firm. Do not eat raw eggs or dip cooked food into any sauce with raw eggs. - Poultry should be cooked thoroughly. If there is pinkish juice running from the cooked poultry or the middle part of its bone is still red, the poultry should be cooked again until fully done.- Wash hands frequently, especially before touching the mouth, nose or eyes, before handling food or eating, and after going to the toilet, touching public installations or equipment such as escalator handrails, elevator control panels or door knobs, or when hands are dirtied by respiratory secretions after coughing or sneezing; and Wear a mask if fever or respiratory symptoms develop, when going to a hospital or clinic, or while taking care of patients with fever or respiratory symptoms.The public may visit the following CHP pages for more information: The Avian Influenza page, The weekly Avian Influenza Report, Global Statistics and Affected Areas of Avian Influenza, the Facebook Page, and the YouTube Channel.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Fujian is a province on the southeast coast of mainland China. - Mod.UBA]******[2] WHO UpdateDate: 7 Aug 2017Source: Disease Outbreak News [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/ 07-august-2017-ah7n9-china/en/>On 11, 14, and 21 Jul 2017, the National Health and Family Planning Commission of China (NHFPC) notified WHO of 3 individual laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China.Details of the case patients----------------------------On 11 Jul 2017, the NHFPC reported one laboratory-confirmed human case of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. The case-patient was a 35-year-old male, who developed symptoms on 23 Jun 2017, and died on 30 Jun 2017. This was the 1st reported case from Xinjiang since April 2015. He was a butcher and seller at a live poultry market.On 14 Jul 2017, the NHFPC reported one laboratory-confirmed human case of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. The case-patient was a 54-year-old male from Yunnan province. He developed symptoms on 23 Jun 2017 and was admitted to hospital with severe pneumonia on 28 Jun 2017. He was reported to have had exposure to a live poultry market.On 21 Jul 2017, the NHFPC reported one laboratory-confirmed human case of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. The case-patient was a 62-year-old female from Jiangsu province. She developed symptoms on 12 Jul 2017 and was admitted to hospital with severe pneumonia on 13 Jul 2017. She was reported to have had exposure to a live poultry market.The Chinese government has assessed that it is still likely that sporadic cases will occur in China, taking into consideration the previous epidemic situation and risk assessment.To date, a total of 1557 laboratory-confirmed human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported in China through IHR notification since early 2013.Public health response------------------The Chinese government at national and local levels continues to take preventive measures, which include:- Continuing to guide the provinces to strengthen assessment, and prevention and control measures.- Continuing to strengthen control measures focusing on hygienic management of live poultry markets and cross-regional transportation.- Conducting detailed source investigations to inform effective prevention and control measures.- Continuing to detect and treat human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) early to reduce mortality.- Continuing to carry out risk communication and issue information notices to provide the public with guidance on self-protection.- Strengthening virology surveillance to better understand levels of virus contamination in the environment as well as mutations in order to provide further guidance for prevention and control.WHO risk assessment---------------------As seen in previous years, the number of weekly reported cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus has decreased over the summer months. However, the number of human infections and the geographical distribution in the 5th epidemic wave (i.e. onset since 1 Oct 2016) has been greater than earlier waves. This suggests that the virus has spread and emphasizes that further intensive surveillance and control measures in both the human and animal health sectors remain crucial.Most human case-patients have been exposed to avian influenza A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, and live poultry vending continues, further human cases can be expected. Additional sporadic human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) are also expected in provinces in China that have not yet reported human cases. Similarly, sporadic human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) detected in countries bordering China would not be unexpected. Although small clusters of cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported, including those involving patients in the same ward, current epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the capacity for sustained transmission among humans. Therefore, the likelihood of further community level spread is considered low.Close analysis of the epidemiological situation and further characterization of the most recent viruses are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.WHO advice---------WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should, if possible, avoid poultry farms, contact with animals in live poultry markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water and follow good food safety and food hygiene practices.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions with regard to this event. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling in, or soon after returning from, an area where avian influenza is a concern.WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and influenza-like illness (ILI), and to carefully review any unusual patterns; ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR 2005; and continue national health preparedness actions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The continuous reporting of human cases merits active surveillance and more awareness efforts for high-risk groups and the general public. - Mod.UBAProMED HealthMaps:China: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>Fujian Province, China: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/332>]
