The Horse [edited]<http://www.thehorse.com/articles/39495/bacteria-behind-mystery-epidemic-in-icelands-horses>Iceland is free of all major equine infectious diseases, so Icelandic horses are particularly susceptible to any new bacteria or virus that enter the country.Researchers from the Animal Health Trust (AHT), in partnership with British and Icelandic research and veterinary institutions, have identified the cause of an epidemic of respiratory disease, which infected not only Iceland's native horse population, but also dogs, cats, and humans.The respiratory disease epidemic in early 2010 was characterized by coughing and nasal discharge. The disease spread through the population of 77 000 Icelandic horses within weeks, leading to a self-imposed ban on their export and significant economic cost to the country. Initially, due to the speed at which the disease had spread, a viral cause was suspected. Investigations by researchers at the University of Iceland showed that only _Streptococcus zooepidemicus_, was consistently recovered from coughing horses and rare fatal cases of infection.However, this bacterium was also often found in healthy horses.Scientists from the AHT and the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, in Cambridge, England, were brought in to investigate.""To identify the culprit, we sequenced the DNA from 257 samples of bacteria from diseased animals and people,"" said Simon Harris, BSc, PhD, senior staff scientist at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute. ""This showed that one specific strain of _S. zooepidemicus_, called ST209, was the likely culprit, and we also found this strain in a human case of blood poisoning. This study highlights, for the 1st time, how DNA sequencing can be used to identify endemic strains of bacteria and distinguish them from the cause of an epidemic infection.""Iceland is free of all major equine infectious diseases thanks to the ban on the importation of horses into the country in place since 1882. Consequently, Icelandic horses are particularly susceptible to any new bacteria or virus that cross the border, and so strict biosecurity regulations are in place to help protect them.Sigriour Bjornsdottir, DVM, PhD, of the MAST (Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority), used information from owners and veterinarians to build an epidemiological network. This enabled her to identify an equine rehabilitation center where horses exercised in a water treadmill. The water treadmill is thought to have provided the perfect conditions for transmitting the disease as water was splashed up and ingested. Horses would complete their rehabilitation and return home, while incubating the disease, taking the infection with them.The ST209 strain of _S. zooepidemicus_ found in Iceland has also been recovered from a coughing horse in Sweden and an abdominal abscess in a Finnish horse trainer.""There are a couple of theories as to how the strain entered Iceland,"" said Andrew Waller, BSc, PhD, head of bacteriology at the AHT. ""These bacteria are able to survive outside a horse for a week or so, which means the import of contaminated equipment or clothing is the most likely route by which ST209 entered Iceland. However, this particular strain could have even infected a human who travelled to Iceland, before spreading the strain back to a horse and triggering the epidemic.""We are delighted to have helped uncover the likely identity of the cause of this epidemic,"" he continued. ""Our investigation highlights the ability of _S. zooepidemicus_ strains to cause disease in animals and people. We found evidence that even endemic strains of _S. zooepidemicus_ were likely causing cases of respiratory disease in Icelandic horses, illustrating that this group of bacteria causes more clinical problems in horses than was previously thought. We hope that raising awareness of the cause of this epidemic, and the likely involvement of a water treadmill as a key factor in disease transmission, will encourage veterinarians around the world to improve disease control precautions preventing future epidemics.""The study, ""Genomic Dissection of an Icelandic Epidemic of Respiratory Disease in Horses and Associated Zoonotic Cases,"" was published in mBio.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Icelandic horses have been bred only with local horses since the Middle Ages. Iceland, a remote and isolated island/state, maintains in-bred animal populations (mainly sheep and horses), which are particularly susceptible to exotic disease agents. In sheep, this, combined with the lengthy periods, each winter, of being kept indoors, has led several times in the past to stormy epizootics caused by introduced disease agents which had been known elsewhere, to be slow and limited in spread (such as paratuberculosis, maedi-visna, adenomatosis, and scrapie).In mid-February 1998, an acute febrile disease of horses started in the Reykjavik area, spreading rapidly more or less over Iceland, morbidity being almost 100 percent while mortality not exceeding 0.2 percent. In spite of extensive investigations in Iceland and in laboratories in Sweden, Germany, USA, and UK, the exact nature of the causal agent of this disease was not determined. Electron microscope pictures from the Animal Health trust in UK and the behavior of the disease strongly indicated that it was an enterovirus belonging to the family of picornaviruses. The virus was considered most likely common to horses in Europe and elsewhere without being recognised outside Iceland as a clinical entity (see 19980811.1576 and other 1998 references in ""see also"" below).The low prevalence of disease in Iceland's horses is maintained by laws preventing horses exported from the country being returned, and by requiring that all equine equipment taken into the country be either new and unused or fully disinfected. As a result, native horses have no acquired immunity to disease. This may explain the 1998 event and the unusual impact of the described 2010 introduction of the exotic strain of _S. zooepidemicus_ (_Streptococcus equi_ subspecies _zooepidemicus_), namely clade 1 (ST209). This strain was identified, according to the paper above (ref 1), in 81 isolates from 45 horses residing at 21 premises across Iceland over a 152-day period between 10 May and 8 Oct 2010. While the route of introduction remains to be speculated, subscribers are referred to the fact that ST209 was also recovered from a human and a cat._Streptococcus equi_ subspecies _zooepidemicus_ (_S. zooepidemicus_) is, generally, not regarded to have significant impact on international trade, being one of the most common bacteria isolated from respiratory infections in horses worldwide.As its name suggests, _S. zooepidemicus_ is a potentially zoonotic pathogen capable of infecting many mammalian species. There have been a number of documented cases of it being the aetiological agent of acute fatal haemorrhagic pneumonia in dogs (20091205.4151 and other 2009 references in ""see also"" below) and serious though rare disease in humans (see 20091209.4191). The possibility that imported cat(s) may have played a role in the epidemiology of the addressed _S. zooepidemicus_ event in Iceland deserves consideration. In a report on a 2009 outbreak of respiratory disease in a cattery, clinical disease was characterized by purulent nasal discharges and cough, progressing to sinusitis, dyspnea, symptoms of pneumonia and death. Pathological examination revealed different degrees of inflammation of the lower respiratory tract. _S. zooepidemicus_ was the main bacterium isolated. Sequencing of the V2 fragment of the 16S gene revealed that the isolates were distributed in 2 previously described genogroups (ref 2).The horse population of Iceland (2016 figures, OIE) is 67 358, kept in 2329 establishments: a globally exceptionally high density of 0.65 horse per sq/km, as well as a relative high equine/human ratio of 1/5 (Iceland's human population was, in 2016, 334 252).References----------1. Bjornsdottir S, Harris SR, Svansson V, Gunnarsson E, et al. Genomic dissection of an Icelandic epidemic of respiratory disease in horses and associated zoonotic cases. mBio 8:e00826-17; available at <http://mbio.asm.org/content/8/4/e00826-17.full>.2. Blum S, Elad D, Zukin N, Lysnyansky I, et al. Outbreak of _Streptococcus equi_ subsp. _zooepidemicus_ infections in cats. Vet Microbiol. 2010; 144(1-2): 236-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.12.040; abstract available at <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20106608>.- Mod.ASA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/38>.]
