EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited][In response to the request for information, the following contribution was received from an EpiCore member]Each of the provinces in country has its own practices regarding vector control. Narrating specifically about Punjab, the highest populated with relatively better infrastructure, the mosquito control measures were first strengthened following 2009-10 multi-district fatal outbreaks of dengue hemorrhagic fever. Special surveillance for _Aedes_ larvae is being conducted on largest scale in Punjab. House-to-house surveying for indoor and outdoor larvae detection has yielded substantial biological evidence over last 6-7 years with resultant seasonal pattern identification.Legislation and law enforcement regarding epidemic prevention and control has also yielded good results. This active surveillance has contributed much toward control of _Aedes_ mosquito and hence the dengue virus and chikungunya virus transmission, despite highest mass transit from all endemic and outbreak foci. In Punjab, only 3 cases of chikungunya have been confirmed in 2017. These are not epi-linked and sporadic in occurrence over wide geographical area. 2 of these have traveled with infection from Sindh Province. 1 case has acquired infection in Punjab.Larvae detection is always high in the monsoon season. Surveillance activities in the field are android enabled and transformed onto an electronic dashboard for daily progress monitoring of real time geo-tagging of detected larvae. Hence, it can be projected that Punjab is least likely to be involved in any bigger outbreaks of chikungunya virus with such strict control measures. If control measures are haltered, the vector is present and may start transmitting viruses at a greater pace.--Communicated by:EpiCore Surveillance Project memberDr Sarmad W Siddiqui Fellow FELTP-Pakistan[ProMED-mail thanks Dr Gaines and Dr Siddiqui for their insightful comments and hopes that public health and vector control authorities in Pakistan will be able to deliberate further on this matter and incorporate similar larvicidal agents in their control strategies, if they are not being used currently.Any updates from EpiCore members in the region on the current vector control practices in use in Pakistan would be appreciated. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/140>.]
