Devex.com [edited]<https://www.devex.com/news/hepatitis-e-outbreak-sparks-concern-in-lake-chad-basin-90821>The hepatitis E virus has become the latest menace in West Africa's ongoing Lake Chad Basin crisis, compounding major challenges already impacting the region, including the threat of violent militant group Boko Haram, food insecurity and limited access to remote and vulnerable populations. Even more troubling, the virus seems to be circulating among displaced populations who frequently uproot and migrate, making it that much harder to contain.Following a recent visit to northeast Nigeria, Dr Philippa Easterbrook, a senior scientist for the WHO's global hepatitis program, spoke to Devex about a recently-developed WHO response plan created to reduce the number of new cases of the virus and provide training to local health workers as a means of improving case management and diagnosis.This water-borne infection was 1st reported in August 2016 in Chad's Samalat region, to the country's southeast. As of July 2017, the country had reported more than 1600 suspected or confirmed cases, and 18 deaths. The virus then surfaced in neighboring Niger in January 2017, in the Diffa region, an area near the Chad and Nigeria borders. Hepatitis E cases here spiked dramatically in mid-April 2017, and decreased before then increasing again. Now approximately 1450 people are suspected to have been infected, more than half of those women, with 38 fatalities.With the frequent movement of internally displaced populations, the infection eventually arrived in Nigeria in May 2017, in Damasak, a town near the Niger border, and has since seen 696 cases total, mostly at the Ngala internally displaced people's camp, near the Cameroon border in Borno state.Currently, all cases of hepatitis E in the Lake Chad region have been among displaced persons and refugees, Easterbrook explained. ""This led us to the working hypothesis that these outbreaks are all linked and related to large population movements,"" she said.Without immediate attention, humanitarians are concerned that the virus could spread even further within impacted countries and even into unaffected areas, such as neighboring Cameroon or the Central African Republic. Even more so, this outbreak is highlighting the unsanitary water conditions affecting those impacted by conflict in the Lake Chad Basin.Hepatitis E is most dangerous in pregnant women, and has an incubation period of 2 to 10 weeks where the infection remains asymptomatic and undetected in most people. Usually symptoms include flu-like symptoms such as: Low-grade fever, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, and most notably jaundice. Because the virus carries symptoms also seen in hepatitis A, yellow fever and malaria cases, diagnosing patients and managing cases can be a challenge. Roughly 5 percent of cases develop more serious complications, according to Easterbrook, however the biggest risk is developing acute liver failure, or in pregnant women, post-partum hemorrhaging which can be fatal.The most pressing agenda in the response plan is the improvement of water and sanitation hygiene in the region. As the virus spreads via contaminated water, Easterbrook cited that the improvement of WASH conditions would not only support the reduction in new hepatitis E cases, but could also reduce the prevalence of other infectious diseases, namely hepatitis A, cholera, and typhoid. To date, roughly 200 restrooms and 100 showers have been constructed in Ngala camp. WHO has also worked with local partners to rehabilitate water points and distribute hygiene kits, which include items such as sanitary napkins and water purification tablets, to women and households. However, cultural barriers impede the progress of these initiatives. ""Some people would rather have low-level restroom facilities rather than walk some distance to a more modernized latrine,"" Easterbrook explained.[Byline: Christin Roby]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Hepatitis E virus (HEV) genotypes 1 and 2 are the major waterborne forms of HEV and they tend to occur in the developing world, especially Africa and Asia. These types can cause significant outbreaks with acute hepatitis deaths, especially in 2nd and 3rd trimester pregnant women. Genotypes 3 and 4 are zoonotic, with swine being a major reservoir, and tend to be seen in the developed world. Type 3 in particular can cause chronic infection, especially in the immunocompromised host. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/20388>.]
