UPI [edited]<https://www.upi.com/Health_News/2017/08/10/Newly-found-immunodeficiency-can-turn-chickenpox-virus-fatal/3271502372667/>Researchers have found a new genetic mutation that makes the chickenpox virus (_Varicella zoster_) life-threatening in rare cases.The study, published this week in the Journal of Clinical Investigation, found that for 2 out of every 10 000 people with the genetic mutation, it can lead to inflammation of the brain, and for 20 out of every 10 000 people, it can lead to severe pneumonia.Researchers identified a mutation of what is known as the POL III sensor, which the immune system uses to identify the genome of _Varicella zoster_ virus, known as chickenpox.In patients with this mutation, their cells do not detect the infection and did not activate the immune system's response, allowing the virus to spread to the brain.""We cannot yet put an exact figure on how much the risk of complications is increased when you have this new immunodeficiency, since we have looked at relatively few patients in our study,"" Professor Trine Hyrup Mogensen, from the Department of Clinical Medicine and the Department of Biomedicine at Aarhus University in Denmark, said in a news release.""Neither do we know how large a proportion of all those who have inflammation of the brain and pneumonia have the defect. But we do know that this applies to both children and adults.""Patients with mutations in POL III have an increased risk of developing serious, life-threatening illness with the chickenpox virus.""Today, it is possible to map the entire genomic composition of an individual. At the same time, the last few decades have seen an explosion in our knowledge of the immune system. Together, this means we are now slowly becoming able to understand the individual differences in susceptibility to infections at both the genetic and molecular level,"" SÌüren Riis Paludan, professor at the Department of Biomedicine at Aarhus University, said.Citation:B. Ogunjimi et al. Inborn errors in RNA polymerase III underlie severe varicella zoster virus infections, J Clin Invest. 2017. doi:10.1172/JCI92280.Abstract:""Varicella zoster virus (VZV) typically causes chickenpox upon primary infection. In rare cases, VZV can give rise to life threatening disease in otherwise healthy people, but the immunological basis for this remains unexplained. We report 4 cases of acute severe VZV infection affecting the central nervous system or the lungs in unrelated, otherwise healthy children who are heterozygous for rare missense mutations in POLR3A (one patient), POLR3C (one patient), or both (two patients). POLR3A and POLR3C encode subunits of RNA polymerase III. Leukocytes from all 4 patients tested exhibited poor IFN induction in response to synthetic or VZV-derived DNA. Moreover, leukocytes from 3 of the patients displayed defective IFN production upon VZV infection and reduced control of VZV replication. These phenotypes were rescued by transduction with relevant WT alleles. This work demonstrates that monogenic or digenic POLR3A and POLR3C deficiencies confer increased susceptibility to severe VZV disease in otherwise healthy children, providing evidence for an essential role of a DNA sensor in human immunity.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Varicella zoster virus (VZV), the causative agent of varicella (chickenpox) during primary infection and zoster (shingles) during reactivation from latency in sensory ganglia, is an alphaherpesvirus. In rare cases, VZV primary infection or reactivation can cause more severe diseases, including pneumonitis and CNS disease, manifesting as cerebellitis, encephalitis, or stroke.This work demonstrates the promise of personalized medicine, with customized treatment of patients. - Mod.LK]
