The Cable [edited] <https://www.thecable.ng/hepatitis-e-kills-four-pregnant-women-borno-400-idps-infected>At least 4 pregnant women have died, while more than 400 internally displaced persons (IDPs) have been infected with hepatitis E in Ngala council area of Borno state.Nicolerta Bellio, MSF medical coordinator, disclosed this in a statement issued in Maiduguri, the state capital. Bellio said the highly contagious disease, which infiltrated the camp from Niger, spread through Ngala camp due to a combination of poor living conditions and flooding.According to Bellio, the camp shelters some 45 000 people who have fled violence stemming from the conflict between Boko Haram and the military.Bellio said that given the poor living conditions in the camp, it was a surprise that the number of cases had not escalated, or even led to an outbreak of cholera. ""The situation in Ngala is very worrying. The onset of the rainy season has caused repeated flooding in the camp, and water gushes across pathways, latrine holes and into people's shelters,"" Bellio said. ""When it rains, the whole camp gets covered in mud and dirty water. This is a recipe for spreading bacteria and disease, particularly as people don't always use the latrines that have been installed in the camp, so wastewater washes out everywhere. There have been more than 400 cases of hepatitis E in the past 2 months, and we have treated 170 patients at our hospital, so it's no surprise that an outbreak of hepatitis E has been declared.""Bellio also spoke of the dangers of the disease to pregnant women and instructed people on how to avoid the disease.""Generally, people recover from hepatitis E if they receive treatment, but the disease can be very dangerous for pregnant women and their unborn babies,"" he said. ""Hepatitis E leads to high rates of spontaneous abortions and stillbirths, as well as babies being born prematurely. It can also cause severe haemorrhages in mothers, both during childbirth and after giving birth.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Hepatitis E virus (HEV) genotypes 1 and 2 are the major waterborne forms of HEV, and they tend to occur in the developing world, especially Africa and Asia. These types can cause significant outbreaks with acute hepatitis deaths, especially in 2nd and 3rd trimester pregnant women. Genotypes 3 and 4 are zoonotic, with swine being a major reservoir, and tend to be seen in the developed world. Type 3 in particular can cause chronic infection, especially in the immunocompromised host. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/621>.]
