Food Safety News [edited]<http://www.foodsafetynews.com/2017/08/doughnut-shop-norovirus-outbreak-victim-count-nears-250/#.WY8f8VGGNPY>With the number of victims nearing 250, public health officials in the Toledo area say they expect more illnesses to be reported in a norovirus outbreak linked to a suburban doughnut shop. Health Commissioner Eric Zgodinski, of the Toledo-Lucas County Public Health Department, met briefly with media on Thu 10 Aug 2017, saying Mama C's Donuts & Coffee in Maumee, OH remains closed. The owners voluntarily closed on Tue 8 Aug 2017 after health officials notified them of illnesses among customers.By Thursday morning [10 Aug 2017] the victim count was 214. By the time Zgodinski met with reporters later in the day, the number was ""closer to 240."" He said he is not aware of secondary infections, meaning the sick people did not contract norovirus from contact with other outbreak victims.The doughnut shop owners have been cooperating fully with health inspectors and are working on deep cleaning the business, Zgodinski said. The doughnut makers hired a professional cleaning company for the job. Before Mama C's can resume operations, the health department must sign off regarding cleaning and other conditions.Health department officials became aware of the norovirus outbreak when local hospitals notified them about a number of people who became ill after eating Mama C's food from 4-7 Aug 2017.The health department tested ""specimens"" from the restaurant, Zgodinski said, according to WTOL-TV Channel 11, a CBS affiliate news station in Toledo. Three of the samples were positive for norovirus, WTOL reported.Norovirus illness can make you feel extremely sick with diarrhea and vomiting many times a day, according to the CDC. Norovirus symptoms usually subside after a couple of days. However, it can lead to severe dehydration and serious, sometimes life-threatening illnesses in the elderly or people with suppressed immune systems, according to the CDC.Other important facts about norovirus, as listed by the CDC, include:- It only takes a very small amount of norovirus particles, fewer than 100, to make you sick;- People with norovirus illness shed billions of virus particles in their stool and vomit and can easily infect others;- You are contagious from the moment you begin feeling sick and for the 1st few days after you recover;- Norovirus can spread quickly in enclosed places like daycare centers, nursing homes, schools and cruise ships;- Norovirus can stay on objects and surfaces and still infect people for days or weeks, and- Norovirus can survive some disinfectants, making it hard to get rid of.[Byline: Coral Beach]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It should be noted that the prototypic norovirus, Norwalk virus, was originally isolated in Norwalk, Ohio, obviously the state where an outbreak popped up at the Republican National Convention in 2016. Norovirus infections and outbreaks are usually more common in cooler, winter months. About half of all cases occur from December through February in countries above the equator and June through August in countries below the equator. However, in places closer to the equator, norovirus may be less seasonal. This may be because of temperature or the timing of the rainy season, but may also be associated with the birth rate. Worldwide, norovirus is the leading cause of gastroenteritis outbreaks. New norovirus strains emerge about every 2 to 4 years. Often, but not always, these new strains lead to an increase in outbreaks worldwide. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/237>.]
