APS [machine transl., edited]<http://www.aps.dz/sante-science-technologie/61720-el-oued-70-cas-de-brucellose-enregistres-durant-le-1er-semestre-2017>No less than 70 cases of human brucellosis have been recorded during the 1st half of 2017 in the province of El-Oued. Of the total number of cases recorded, 60 percent were diagnosed in 4 communes (El-M'ghair, Reguiba, Oum-Toyour and Still) considered as foci of this disease, due to high amount of livestock, goats and cattle in particular, said the APS doctor at the prevention department Kamel Dif.The highest number of cases of brucellosis is generally recorded during the spring period (March, April and May), characterized by high consumption of raw milk, especially in pastoral areas . An extensive awareness program on the fight against this disease was launched in 2017 by the health sector targeting breeders, as well as producers and consumers of raw milk, according to this official. The aim of this awareness-raising action is to anchor the culture of prevention among consumers of raw milk, he said.Brucellosis vaccination partners are also being led by the Agricultural Services Directorate (DSA) to protect livestock against this zoonosis.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This infection, a bacterial zoonosis, is classified among the category B biowarfare agents. Natural transmission to humans occurs after occupational exposure or through ingestion of contaminated food products. Although brucellosis has become a rare entity in the United States and many industrialized nations because of animal vaccination programs, this condition remains a significant health problem in many developing countries.Each species of _Brucella_ has a specific animal reservoir in which chronic disease is present. The bacilli tend to localize in the reproductive organs of the animals, causing sterility and abortions, and are shed in large numbers in the animal's urine, milk, and placental fluid. This localization allows for efficient spread to farmers, veterinarians, slaughterhouse workers, and consumers.Among the 4 species known to cause disease in humans, _Brucella melitensis_ (from goats, sheep, or camels) may be the most virulent, producing the most severe and acute cases of brucellosis with disabling complications. A prolonged course of illness, which may be associated with suppurative destructive lesions, is associated with _B. suis_ (from feral or commercially raised pigs) infection. _B. abortus_ (from cattle, buffalo, and camels) is associated with mild-to-moderate sporadic disease that is rarely associated with complications.In the Maghreb and the Middle East, human brucellosis is usually contracted through consumption of raw goat / ewe's milk or local artisanal cheese made from the raw milk and _Brucella melitensis_ is responsible for the great majority of the reported cases, with a marked predominance of its biovar 3, as in other Mediterranean countries.El Oued Province lies in the Sahara desert in northeast Algeria. The mostly uninhabited southern half of the province is covered by the Grand Erg Oriental, a vast region of uninterrupted sand dunes. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/44784>.]
