Eurosurveillance 2017;22(33) [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22857>A cluster of measles linked to an imported case, Finland, 2017-----------------------------------------------------------------------SeppÌ lÌ  E, ZÌ¦ldi V, Vuorinen S, Murtopuro S, et al.A young Italian adult was diagnosed with measles in Finland in June 2017. During the stay in Finland and subsequent travel to Estonia, the case exposed altogether several hundred persons to measles. As of [Fri 11 Aug 2017], 5 secondary cases of measles have been detected. As the investigation is still ongoing, we present here the preliminary findings and implemented control measures regarding this cluster of measles.Description of the cluster--------------------------Index Case 1 was a young Italian adult who arrived in Finland on [Sun 11 Jun 2017] and attended an international camp in Finland from 12 to 25 Jun [2017] (Figure 1 [for Figures/Tables, see original URL - Mod.LL]).After developing fever and respiratory symptoms on [Fri 16 Jun 2017] and rash on [Wed 21 Jun 2017], Case 1 was admitted to the hospital of City A and was isolated and monitored because enterovirus infection or measles was suspected. Serum and throat specimens were taken on [Thu 22 Jun 2017]. While the confirmatory laboratory results were still pending, the case was discharged and returned to the camp premises on [Sat 24 Jun 2017]. On [Sun 25 Jun 2017], Case 1 traveled to Helsinki by train (without a designated seat, 3.5 hours) and to Tallinn by ferry (no cabin booked, 2.5 hours), staying one night before flying back to Italy. On [Tue 27 Jun 2017], Case 1 was laboratory-confirmed for measles infection. The case self-reported to be vaccinated with 2 doses of measles-containing vaccine; however, the laboratory results contradicted this as the case tested negative for measles-specific IgG antibodies (Table).Subsequently, 5 secondary cases of measles were identified (Figures 1 and 2). 4 of them were laboratory-confirmed (Cases 2, 4, 5 and 6). Case 3 was classified as a probable case (no laboratory testing because of parental objection). Cases 2 and 3 were adolescent siblings living in City A. Both attended a summer camp organized at the same premises as the international camp. Both were placed in home isolation. Case 4 was a person working in a cafeteria in City B who had visited the camp premises on [Mon 19 Jun 2017]. Cases 2, 3 and 4 had lunch in the same canteen used by other camp attendees including Case 1. Epidemiological investigations for Case 5 are still ongoing but so far no link between other cases has been established. It is possible that there is an unknown case in the transmission chain. Case 6 was a close contact of Case 5, identified during contact tracing. The case had been vaccinated with 2 doses of the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine in childhood; all other secondary cases were unvaccinated (Table).Laboratory findings----------------------Healthcare providers were asked to send all clinical samples from suspected measles cases to the measles reference laboratory of the Finnish National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL). Measles sequences available for 5 cases were identical and genotyped as D8 (Table). Based on the Measles Nucleotide Surveillance database, this strain was identical to strains isolated in Italy during 2017 and to a strain identified in a British traveler, and it shared very high nucleotide similarity (>‰Ûä99.78 percent) with more than 600 sequences detected on 5 continents between 2015 and 2017, indicating recent global spread of nearly identical measles viruses [1,2]. 6 suspected cases were discarded after laboratory analysis. In addition, 3 potentially exposed, asymptomatic people tested negative for measles.Conclusion------------In Finland, a country with nationally high MMR vaccination coverage, extensive outbreaks of measles are unlikely to occur. However, transmission chains among unimmunized individuals linked to an imported case are possible. A prompt response and the cooperation of health authorities, the media and possible other stakeholders are crucial to interrupt transmission chains as soon as possible. Ensuring universally high vaccination coverage is essential to prevent clusters and outbreaks in the future.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The full report can be found at the source URL. - Mod.ML]******[2] ItalyDate: Thu 17 Aug 2017Source: Eurosurveillance 2017;22(33) [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22858>Ongoing large measles outbreak with nosocomial transmission in Milan, northern Italy, March-August 2017--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Amendola A, Bianchi S, Frati ER, Ciceri G, et al.A large measles outbreak has been ongoing in Milan and surrounding areas, a densely populated area with nearly 4 million inhabitants. Rapid and active surveillance was set up by the Subnational Reference Laboratories (SRL) Milan, established as part of the measles and rubella surveillance network MoRoNet [1] in March 2017, with 303 investigated cases at the time of submission of this report. We present a detailed analysis of the period 1 Mar 2017 to 30 Jun 2017, with the aim to conduct a complete and rapid characterization of wild-type measles virus (MV) strains circulating.Confirmation and investigation of cases and clusters in Milan---------------------------------------------------------------------From 1 Mar to 30 Jun 2017, 233 suspected cases of measles were investigated: there were 203 (87 percent) laboratory-confirmed cases (median age: 30 years; range: 2 months-77 years) and 30 (13 percent) were discarded. Overall 60 percent (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø121) of the confirmed cases were individuals aged 15-39 years and 6 percent (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø12) were‰Ûä‰ä ‰Ûä1 year of age; 88 percent (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø179) were not vaccinated and 12 percent (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø24) were vaccinated (6 with 2 doses of measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, 10 with one dose, and 8 did not know the number of doses). According to the epidemiological regional database, 108 of 203 were sporadic cases and 95 were related to 47 clusters. Cases were classified as sporadic when an epidemiological link to other cases could not be established.Molecular surveillance for cases and clusters---------------------------------------------------The genotype of MV strains was successfully identified in 187 of 203 (92 percent) of the confirmed cases by sequencing the highly variable region of nucleoprotein (N) gene (N-450) [2]. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the MV strains belonged to genotypes D8 and B3. The most common genotype detected was genotype D8 (86 percent; 160/187 cases) which was related to 77 cases in 42 clusters and 83 sporadic cases. All of the D8 cases and clusters were autochthonous or from unknown source.In March 2017, the B3 genotype was detected in 5 imported cases: 2 sporadic cases and 3 cases which subsequently caused 3 import-related clusters. From Apr 2017 to end of Jun 2017, a further 14 autochthonous sporadic cases and one cluster were reported. The geographical and temporal distribution, respectively, of sporadic cases and clusters related to D8 and B3 genotypes are shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2 [for Figures, see original URL - Mod.LL].Measles virus genotype D8------------------------------Phylogenetic analysis showed that all the D8 sequences (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø160) fell into the Osaka lineage (MVi/Osaka.JPN/29.15; similarity range: 99-100 percent). From March to May, D8 MV strains mainly caused clusters in work and family settings, which occurred principally in the north-eastern area of Milan. During the week starting on [Mon 27 Mar 2017], a serious family cluster affected 3 cases causing the death of one of them. The D8 MV strain was isolated from the biological samples of one of these cases.In Jun 2017, the D8 Osaka variant spread through the city of Milan and caused a nosocomial cluster in a hospital. Based on epidemiological data, a link was established between 12 cases: 8 healthcare workers (HCWs), 3 patients and one visitor. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the 9 sequences obtained were 100 percent identical. The match of epidemiological data and phylogenetic analysis highlighted a single transmission chain for all cases (Figure 3).Measles virus genotype B3------------------------------Phylogenetic analysis showed that all B3 sequences (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø27) were identical to the variant Dublin (MVs/Dublin.IRL/8.16; similarity: 100 percent) which is circulating in European countries and responsible for an ongoing epidemic in Romania [3]. The B3 Dublin variant was 1st introduced in the east of Milan at the beginning of March 2017, and there was an epidemiological link to the Roma community in France. By the end of March [2017], this variant was detected in a sporadic case returning from Piedmont (northern Italy). Subsequently, the same variant was isolated in a cluster caused by an index case returning from the Apulia Region (southern Italy) and in a cluster that was imported from Romania. In April 2017, genotype B3 was identified in a sporadic case returning from the Lazio Region (central Italy).During May 2017 and June 2017, 12 autochthonous cases were notified in the eastern and south-eastern suburbs of Milan. In June [2017], 3 nosocomial clusters were identified in an emergency department. Although initially reported as unrelated clusters, the phylogenetic analysis showed a single source of transmission (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø7, 2 HCWs, 4 patients, and one visitor) (Figure 3).Conclusions--------------Eliminating measles and rubella is a core goal of World Health Organization European Region Member States. Effective surveillance is essential for eliminating measles and rubella and its verification [4]. Since the beginning of 2017 and up to [Sun 6 Aug 2017], the Italian Ministry of Health has reported 4087 cases of measles and 3 deaths. Most cases occurred in Piedmont and Lombardy (northern Italy), Tuscany, Lazio and Abruzzo (central Italy) and Sicily (southern Italy). Most were older than 15 years (median age: 27 years) and 89 percent of the cases were not vaccinated. Overall, 42 percent of the cases were hospitalized and 277 cases were reported among HCWs [5].Timely measles surveillance is critical to disease control. Identifying and confirming suspected measles cases through surveillance allows early detection of outbreaks and analysis of ongoing transmission in order to mount more effective vaccination measures. MV genotyping can play an important role in tracking transmission pathways during outbreak investigations [6].From March to June 2017, the genotypes D8 and B3 co-circulated in Milan and surrounding areas. The most common genotype detected was genotype D8, related to 83 sporadic cases and 42 clusters. The high similarity between the D8 MV strains, all belonging to the Osaka lineage, suggests a unique initiating transmission event. This is the 1st evidence of the Osaka D8 variant in northern Italy, which seems to be replacing the D8 variants that had been circulating in this area since 2013 [7,8]. Moreover, our data show multiple imported cases of B3 MV strains which subsequently spread across Italy and caused several autochthonous cases and clusters. The B3 Dublin variant has replaced the B3 variant Como that had been present in this Italian area from August 2015 to November 2016 [9].By the end of June 2017, D8 MV strains and B3 MV strains had caused clusters in 2 major Milanese hospitals. In August (current month) [2017], the epidemic is still ongoing and the number of notified cases during the month of July was almost twice the number of cases notified in June [2017]. Other authors have already reported that where there is evidence of both nosocomial and community transmission of measles, nosocomial transmission appeared to precede community transmission with a peak of hospital-acquired cases occurring almost 2 weeks before the peak of the community outbreak [10].In conclusion, the suboptimal immunization level (92.5 percent vaccination coverage rate in Lombardy Region; [11]) and the consequent accumulation of susceptible population have led to an increase in the transmission of measles in northern Italy with detrimental effects on both public health and ongoing measles elimination efforts. Furthermore, the nosocomial outbreaks highlight the importance of improving measles vaccination coverage of healthcare workers.[The full report can be found at the source URL. - Mod.ML]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] ItalyDate: Thu 17 Aug 2017Source: Eurosurveillance 2017;22(33) [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22859>A nosocomial measles outbreak in Italy, February-April 2017--------------------------------------------------------------------Porretta A, Quattrone F, Aquino F, Pieve G, et al.Measles vaccination coverage is suboptimal in Italy (ranging between 85.4 percent and 90.6 percent for one dose during the period 2007-2016) [1], which has led to large pockets of susceptible adults. We describe an outbreak in an Italian hospital between February and April 2017 among healthcare workers (HCW), hospital support personnel (hospital workers in activities not involving direct contact with patients), hospital visitors and community contacts. This outbreak was part of a wider epidemic in Italy that started in January 2017 and has, as at [Sun 30 Jul 2017], led to 4001 cases nationwide (275 in HCW) [2].Outbreak description------------------------A HCW was referred to the emergency department (ED) of an Italian hospital for a rash developed after taking antibacterials for a mild cough and coryza. The rash was considered an allergic reaction to the antibacterial and the HCW was admitted to the hospital inpatient clinic. Three days later, the HCW's child was admitted to hospital for a rash diagnosed as due to a non-communicable systemic disease.Subsequent serology showed that both the HCW and the child had measles. The origin of the infection for the index case is still unknown. It should be noted, however, that at least 10 community cases of measles occurred in the same period in the area of residence of the HCW.Using the standard case definition of the European Commission [3], a total of 34 measles cases during the following weeks were identified by tracing the contacts of the index case. Among them, 15 were HCWs, 5 were support personnel, 4 were hospital visitors and 11 were community contacts of the above cases.The secondary cases to the index (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø8) occurred in 2 of the HCW's relatives, in 4 other HCWs, and in 2 support workers who were not immediately recognized as belonging to the hospital outbreak. One of the secondary cases, a HCW, was in service until the onset of symptoms, accessing all rooms on 2 inpatient wards. Tertiary cases (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø6) involved the family of this HCW, 3 HCWs and a member of support personnel.A total of 2 weeks after the admission of the index case, 2 of the HCWs belonging to tertiary cases presented during the night to the ED where they stayed for nearly 10 hours. An additional 15 cases could be traced following this single exposure window, namely 7 HCWs, 2 support workers, 3 relatives of theirs and 3 visitors to the ED during the time the 2 HCWs were present. One more community case was related to contact outside hospital with one of the tertiary HCW cases. Additional cases were related to a visitor at one of the involved inpatient wards, who probably got in contact with one of the tertiary cases who were HCW during the incubation period and generated 3 cases in the community, among them a family pediatrician.Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the epidemic curve and the outbreak tree [for figures, see original URL - Mod.LL].Characteristics of cases----------------------------Up to 6 cases occurred in children up to 9 years of age, while 2 occurred in adolescents between 10 and 17 years and the majority of cases (n‰Ûø=‰Ûø27) in adults‰Ûä18 years and older. Figure 3 describes the age distribution among different categories of cases.Vaccination status was known for 24 cases. Sixteen were unvaccinated (2 children, 14 adults), 2 had received one dose, one a full course of 2 doses, and 5 cases occurred in contacts who received one dose of post-exposure vaccination. Of the 5 contacts who received post exposure vaccine, one was an infant‰Ûäyounger than‰Ûäone year for whom information about the date of vaccination is not available; for the other 4, the delay between presumed contact date and immunization was 3 days in 2 cases, 6 and 12 days for the remaining 2 cases. Among the HCWs, 2 were vaccinated, 11 were unvaccinated and for 2 of them the data was unavailable. Among the 5 cases belonging to support personnel 2 were unvaccinated and the status was unknown for the remaining 3.Genotyping was available for 3 cases: genotype B3, subtype 3.1 was found in all of them.Conclusion and recommendations---------------------------------------Measles elimination in Europe, despite the immunization efforts, is still jeopardized by recurrent outbreaks in susceptible populations [4-7]. Nosocomial transmission of measles is an important and emerging way of spreading the infection [8-11]. Anyone staying in the hospital environment, regardless of role, can be affected because measles is highly contagious and persists in the environment for up to 2 hours, thus requiring appropriate and timely infection control measures [12,13].Considering that transmission may occur 3 days before the onset of rash, early diagnosis when only non-specific preliminary symptoms (cough, coryza and conjunctivitis) are present is crucial for containing the outbreak [14].A single exposure window, that occurred 2 weeks after the admission of the index case, when 2 cases were present in the ED, resulted in further 15 cases. Appropriate procedures are needed for patients with suspect transmissible infection in the ED, an issue not limited to measles but shared with several other highly infective conditions [13].A 2-dose vaccination is the most effective measure to prevent measles [15]. This is of crucial importance for HCWs, with a view to their higher risk of exposure and of transmission to vulnerable patients.However, it should be noted that in at least 5 cases in this outbreak, measles occurred in personnel working in the hospital environment in support functions, highlighting the need to take into consideration the role of such personnel in the spread of the infection. Given that most of the support personnel belong to outsourced services, coordination is needed between occupational health unit and occupational health responsible of outsourced services.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The full report can be found at the source URL. - Mod.MLThere is no doubt that inadequate immunization levels are the major contributor to outbreaks of measles. Most of this is due to not receiving the 2 doses of vaccine due to personal or parenteral choice. Aggressive programs to reverse this unfortunate trend are needed to prevent outbreaks of this potentially lethal disease. The nosocomial setting as reflected in the 3rd post represents a special case situation. It is not clear why health care workers are not required to be immunized for measles. Additionally, when a case of measles is introduced into a health care facility, it has been my experience that the infection is not recognized promptly to minimize nosocomial spread.HealthMap/ProMED-mail maps can be found atFinland: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/118>Italy: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/75>- Mod.LL]
