California Health Alert Network [edited]<http://www.sandiegocounty.gov/content/dam/sdc/hhsa/programs/phs/cahan/communications_documents/08-16-2017-Hep%20A.pdf>Update no. 5: hepatitis A virus outbreak in San Diego county------------------------------------------------------------This health advisory updates local healthcare providers about recent hepatitis A virus (HAV) infections disproportionately affecting homeless and illicit drug-using individuals in San Diego County. Updated recommendations and resources on HAV are provided.Situation---------As of 14 Aug 2017, 333 confirmed or probable HAV cases have been reported in an ongoing local outbreak in San Diego County. The cases had symptom onsets between 22 Nov 2016 and 8 Aug 2017. 232 (70 percent) of the cases have been hospitalized, and 11 patients (3 percent) have died. The cases range in age from 19 to 87 years (median = 44 years), and 227 (68 percent) are male, with 2 (1 percent) self-identifying as men who have sex with men (MSM).131 (39 percent) of the HAV cases are homeless and reported injection or non-injection illicit drug use, 53 (16 percent) were homeless only, 36 (11 percent) were illicit drug users only, 76 (23 percent) were neither homeless nor drug users, and 37 (11 percent) had an unknown status for homelessness and drug use. Of the cases with test results available for review, 58 of 262 (22 percent) have chronic hepatitis C infection, and 15 of 261 (6 percent) have chronic hepatitis B infection.Despite the fact that the majority of the cases in this outbreak had a known indication for HAV immunization, only one case had been vaccinated prior to becoming infected: a 20-year-old who had routine HAV immunizations as a child.Most of the outbreak cases have been from the El Cajon/La Mesa area and downtown San Diego. Some cases have been confirmed in individuals who were only in the southern or northern parts of the county during their exposure periods. There are several clusters of epidemiologically associated cases, although no specific common food, beverage, or drug sources have been identified. Case clusters have been reported in individuals who have used the same homeless services providers and in the following types of facilities with shared restrooms: jails, single room occupancy hotels, residential drug treatment facilities, and assisted living facilities. 3 healthcare workers contracted HAV infection in this outbreak, as have four food handlers, although no secondary cases have resulted from the individuals working in these sensitive occupations.The CDC has confirmed HAV RNA in serum samples of 199 outbreak cases. Viral sequencing indicates that 8 unique, closely related strains of HAV genotype 1B are involved. These strains are different than those associated with an ongoing HAV outbreak in southeastern Michigan and the outbreaks linked to frozen strawberries in 2016 and pomegranate arils (seed pods) in 2013. The main outbreak strain in San Diego is identical to one of the strains causing an ongoing HAV outbreak in Santa Cruz County.Investigations of the confirmed and probable cases, as well as 37 suspect cases, are ongoing. 19 HAV cases have been reported in 2017 that are travel-related and are not part of the local outbreak totals. Of note, 1 case was diagnosed with symptomatic HAV infection 4 weeks after a trip to Paris, and viral sequence analysis indicated that the HAV strain causing his infection is identical to the one causing an outbreak among MSM in France.Background----------Person-to-person transmission through the fecal-oral route is the primary means of HAV transmission in the USA. Most infections result from close personal contact with an infected household member or sexual partner, or their fecally contaminated environment. Hands may play a significant role in the direct and indirect spread of HAV. Commonsource outbreaks and sporadic cases can also occur from exposure to fecally contaminated food or water.Individuals with increased risk for HAV infection include: travelers to countries with high or intermediate endemicity of HAV, MSM, users of injection and non-injection illicit drugs, persons with clotting factor disorders, and persons working with nonhuman primates. HAV outbreaks have been reported among the homeless, who have a higher morbidity and mortality when compared with the general population and an increased risk of infection due to living conditions. Individuals with chronic liver conditions, such as hepatitis B or C, are also recommended to get HAV vaccination because of their increased morbidity and mortality risks should they contract HAV.Recommendations for providers-----------------------------1. Consider HAV infection in individuals, especially the homeless and those who use illicit drugs, with discrete symptom onset and jaundice or elevated liver function tests.- Symptoms of concern include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, fever, malaise, dark urine, light-colored stool, and abdominal pain.- A complete serology panel with testing for hepatitis A, B, and C is recommended in symptomatic patients. HIV testing is also recommended for those with an undocumented HIV-status.- Serologic testing for HAV infection is not recommended in asymptomatic individuals or as screening before vaccination.2. Promptly report all confirmed and suspect HAV cases to the Epidemiology Program.- Please fax Confidential Morbidity Report (CMRa) [<http://www.sandiegocounty.gov/content/dam/sdc/hhsa/programs/phs/documents/CMRa.pdf>], or call 619-692-8499 (Monday-Friday, 8 AM-5 PM), or 858565-5255 (after hours, during weekends, and on county-observed holidays).- Since this outbreak involves homeless individuals, providers are urged to contact the Epidemiology Program while suspected cases are still at the healthcare facility. This action will ensure that a public health investigator can interview the patient by phone for a risk history and will facilitate serum specimen submission to the San Diego County Public Health Laboratory for possible genotyping.3. Provide post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for close contacts of confirmed HAV cases.- Susceptible people exposed to HAV should receive a dose of single-antigen HAV vaccine intramuscular (IM) immune globulin (IG) (0.1 mL/kg), or both, as soon as possible within 2 weeks of last exposure. The PEP dosage of IG was recently increased and is higher than that noted in the package insert.- The efficacy of combined HAV/Hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccine (Twinrixå¨) for PEP has not been evaluated, so it is not recommended for PEP.- Detailed information on PEP may be found on the CDPH [California Department of Public Health] Hepatitis A PEP Guidance Quicksheet (updated July 2017) [<https://archive.cdph.ca.gov/programs/immunize/Documents/CDPH_HAV%20PEP%20Clinical%20Guidance.pdf>] and the CDPH Hepatitis A PEP IG Administration Quicksheet (updated August 2017) [<https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CID/DCDC/CDPH%20Document%20Library/Immunization/HepatitisA-IGPEPGuidance.pdf>].4. Provide HAV vaccine to homeless individuals, illicit drug users, patients with chronic liver diseases, MSM, and other at-risk people who are not already immunized, and to any individual who desires immunity to HAV.- The 1st dose of single-antigen HAV vaccine (Havrixå¨, Vaqtaå¨) appears to protect more persons than the 1st dose of the combined HAV/HBV (Twinrixå¨) vaccine, but efficacy is comparable after completion of the respective series. Providers should consider short-term risks of exposure to HAV, the likelihood of follow-up to complete immunization, and the need for protection from HBV when selecting vaccines for those at risk. Immunization against HAV with existing supplies should not be delayed to obtain a different formulation of vaccine.- Providers who do not have available vaccine may direct patients to an immunization clinic at the nearest County Public Health Center. -Providers who care for homeless individuals may contact the Immunization Program at 619-692-5607 (Monday-Friday, 8 AM-5 PM) to learn how to obtain 317-funded HAV vaccine for use during this outbreak.- Homeless individuals and illicit drug users are also at higher risk for other vaccine preventable diseases and should be brought up-to-date with recommended vaccines per the relevant CDC immunization schedule.- Providers should check the San Diego Immunization Registry to see if patients are already vaccinated and note any vaccinations given.- Some individuals who are at risk for HAV may be uncomfortable disclosing the reasons that they are at risk to a provider, so the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices routinely recommends HAV vaccination ""for any person wishing to obtain immunity.""- Adult HAV vaccination is covered by Medi-Cal without prior authorization.5. Provide HAV vaccination to individuals who have frequent, ongoing close contact with homeless individuals and illicit drug users, and to all food handlers in San Diego County.- The County Public Health Officer recommends HAV vaccination for individuals with ongoing, close contact with homeless and illicit drug using individuals in San Diego County. This local recommendation is being made due to the current outbreak and includes persons working in health care, public safety, sanitation, homeless shelters, and homeless and behavioral service provider agencies.- The County Public Health Officer recommends HAV vaccination for all food handlers in San Diego County. This local recommendation is being made to reduce the potential risk of an ill food handler transmitting HAV to others.6. Encourage those who are planning an international trip to check the CDC Travelers' Health website and to obtain recommended vaccinations before travel.- High-risk areas for HAV include parts of Africa and Asia, and moderate-risk areas include Central and South America, Eastern Europe, and parts of Asia.- There are currently HAV outbreaks associated with MSM occurring in New York City and in Western Europe, notably France, Portugal, and Spain. MSM should be vaccinated against HAV, especially prior to travel, and be instructed on prevention measures for HAV and other sexually transmitted illnesses.7. Ensure that all healthcare workers use standard precautions in patient care to protect themselves against HAV. HAV, like norovirus, is a non-enveloped virus, and it may be similarly difficult to inactivate in the environment. Alcohol-based hand rubs and typically-used surface disinfectants may not be effective. Therefore, additional precautions to take include:- Wash hands with soap and running water for at least 20 seconds after providing care for an HAV patient.- Use contact precautions, in addition to standard precautions, in the care of diapered or incontinent HAV patients.- Wash hands with soap and running water for at least 20 seconds before eating and after using a restroom.- Use employee-designated restrooms when available, and do not touch the door handle directly when exiting a restroom.- Do not eat in patient care areas and never share food, drink or cigarettes with patients.- Do not handle a cell phone just before (or while) eating. Studies have shown that cell phones have high rates of surface contamination with enteric organisms (and for hospital employees, organisms associated with hospital acquired infections).- Perform environmental cleaning in areas housing HAV patients with bleach products or other products effective against norovirus.- HAV vaccine is recommended for unvaccinated healthcare workers caring for HAV patients or individuals at risk for HAV. The vaccine should be available and encouraged for other unvaccinated healthcare personnel concerned about increased exposure to HAV.--Communicated by:Eric McDonaldCounty of San Diego Health and Human Services AgencyCaliforniaUSA<eric.mcdonald@sdcounty.ca.gov>[ProMED thanks Eric McDonald for this posting.An outbreak epicurve showing number of cases plotted against week of onset of symptoms is included in the report and can be found at the source URL above. Since mid-April 2017, about 15-20 cases per week have been reported and seems to be continuing at this rate. A more detailed description of the case cohort is included in this report and 66 percent had either homelessness and/or non-injection illicit drug use as risk factors. At this point, there have been 11 deaths in the cohort but it is not clear if co-infection with either HBV or HCV is a risk factor for death. Clearly, MSM is not a significant risk factor in this ongoing outbreak. - Mod.LLThe state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/787>. San Diego county can be seen on the map at <http://geology.com/county-map/california-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
