Alaska Public [edited]<http://www.alaskapublic.org/2017/08/14/tularemia-reported-around-fairbanks-palmer-vets-urge-quick-diagnosis-treatment-for-pets/>The state Department of Fish and Game is warning pet owners in the Interior and Southcentral Alaska about a recent spike in reports of tularemia - sometimes called ""rabbit fever."" The disease is treatable, but it's essential to get an animal to a veterinarian as soon as possible when they're showing signs, like high fever.State Wildlife Veterinarian Kimberlee Beckmen said her office is getting the word out about tularemia after a recent rash of reports of animals sickened by the disease around Fairbanks and Palmer.""Just in the last 2 weeks, there's been a very significant increase in the number of reports,"" Beckman said. ""In fact I had 5 reports in just 2 days, earlier this week [week of Sun 13 Aug 2017].""Beckmen advises pet owners to keep a close eye on their animals for any signs of the disease, because it can kill quickly.""Many people, if their dog is just acting lethargic, maybe has a little fever, they might wait 1-2 days to go in [to the veterinarian],"" Beckman said. ""But we want people to know this is really an urgent matter, to get on antibiotics, sooner rather than later.""Beckman cited the example of 2 household cats in North Pole that died last week [week of Sun 6 Aug 2017], soon after their owner noticed one of them was sick.""The 1st one died and was diagnosed,"" Beckman said. ""And yet, in the same household, the 2nd cat became ill, and wasn't treated in time. So they lost their other cat.""Bob Gerlach, the State Veterinarian, said pet owners should look for signs that may not be so easy to detect, especially in younger animals.""Generally, pets can show mild infection and show no signs,"" Gerlach said. ""Or may show some fever, lack of appetite, lethargy and just not feeling good.""Fish and Game experts say pet owners shouldn't allow cats and dogs to eat hares, voles and other small mammals that could contract tularemia. Pets that show any signs of the disease should be examined and treated as soon as possible, the experts say.Beckmen said cats and dogs usually contract tularemia by eating the flesh of a sickened animal - usually, the snowshoe hare. She said humans, in turn, can come down with the disease through their household pets. She said it doesn't happen often; the most recent reported case in the Interior was 2 years ago, when a North Pole man got sick after skinning an infected hare.""It can be very, very serious,"" Beckman said. ""I know of one case where a person who got it from taking a hare out of their cat's mouth, and had some serious, permanent heart damage.""Beckmen said hares, rabbits and other small mammals come into contact with the bacteria that causes tularemia through ticks that latch on to them. She said the growing number of tick species in this part of the subarctic contributes to the increase in reports of animals contracting the disease.In Alaska, hares and other mammals most often are exposed to the bacteria that cause tularemia through the bite of a hare tick. But, Beckmen says in recent years other ticks have been showing up in the Interior that also could transmit the bacteria. (Alaska Department of Fish and Game)""The hare ticks and vole ticks are normal and we've always had those,"" Beckman said. ""But what's new is that we have dog ticks. And for about the past 10 years probably those were introduced and they've become established.""Beckmen also said there are a lot more snowshoe hares this year [2017] because the species is nearing the peak of its population cycle.""There's a very high number of hares, which happens on a 7-to 10-year cycle,"" Beckman said. ""So we expect to see a lot more tularemia during a 'hare high.' ""Gerlach, the state vet, said livestock usually aren't susceptible to tularemia. But he said they can come into contact with the bacteria, especially in the wild, where it can live for long periods in the soil.[Byline: Tim Ellis]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Tularemia results from infection by _Francisella tularensis_ sub sp tularensis_ (Type A) (formerly known as _Pasteurella tularensis_) and is associated with lagomorphs (rabbits and hares) in North America. It is transmitted primarily by ticks and biting flies, and is highly virulent for humans and domestic rabbits._F. tularensis_ can be transmitted by ingestion, inhalation, arthropod-borne transfer, or direct contact through the skin and mucous membranes. Organisms are found in the blood and tissues of infected animals and can survive for long periods on fomites including food and water.In addition to vector transmission, tularemia may be spread by contact with infected animals or environmental fomites, by inhalation, or by ingestion of the poorly cooked flesh of infected animals, or contaminated water.Tularemia is difficult to prevent since it can be in the environment or be spread by insects. Prevention measures include keeping pets indoors and away from wildlife. Do not feed animals raw meat, especially that from wild animals. Control ticks and biting flies. There are several good products, both oral and topical for controlling ticks and fleas and biting flies. Check with your veterinarian about which product is recommended in your area.Lastly, this agent is a category A bioterrorism agent. - Mod.TGPortions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/FastFacts/pdfs/tularemia_F.pdf>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/206>.]
