The News [edited]<https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/224669-Patient-tested-positive-at-HFH>A patient undergoing treatment at one of the 3 teaching hospitals in town, Holy Family Hospital, tested positive for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) on [Sat 19 Aug 2017]. The patient was taken to the Holy Family Hospital on [Mon 14 Aug 2017] from Tehsil Hazro of District Attock, some 80 kilometres [49.70 mi] from Rawalpindi.The confirmation of the patient has strengthened doubts that the population in the region may face a possible spike of CCHF ahead of Eidul Azha [Islamic festival] when sacrificial animals are being brought to the town in bulk.However, it is important that this is not the 1st confirmed case of CCHF this year [2017] at the HFH. Data reveal that this year, [2017], a total of 22 suspected cases of CCHF were admitted to HFH, 5 of whom tested positive for the disease while 17 were negative. Studies show that the CCHF is caused by Nairovirus of the Bunyaviridae family transmitted to humans by the bite of hyalomma tick found on the skin of animals including goat and sheep or by direct contact with the blood of an infected animal or human. The case fatality rate ranges from 2 to 50 per cent. CCHF was 1st described in Crimea in 1944 and identified in 1956 in Congo.It is worth mentioning here that the disease was 1st reported in Pakistan in 1976 but the numbers of cases have risen dramatically since 2000, with 50 to 60 patients being reported annually. It is important that the CCHF is endemic in Pakistan.The patient is undergoing treatment at the HFH in isolation. He is stable, said the head of the Department of Infectious Diseases at Rawalpindi Medical University, assistant professor Dr Muhammad Mujeeb Khan while talking to 'The News' on [Sat 19 Aug 2017]. To avoid CCHF, he suggested that proper preventive measures should be taken while handling animals. It is better to establish water ponds carrying DEET or potassium permanganate and animals should be passed through it to clear their skin, he said.[byline: Muhammad Qasim]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] CCHF advisory noticeDate: Fri 18 Aug 2017Source: Pakistan Today [edited]<https://www.pakistantoday.com.pk/2017/08/18/nih-issues-advisory-on-congo-fever-for-eid-ul-azha/>The National Institute of Health (NIH) issued an advisory notice on [Fri 18 Aug 2017] on prevention and control of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) for upcoming Eid-ul-Azha.According to NIH, the objective of this advice was to sensitize human and animal health care authorities to further strengthen and improve the level of preparedness in prevention and control of CCHF.The notice, which was issued by the NIH Field Epidemiology and Disease Surveillance Division, said that the CCHF is a widespread disease caused by a tickborne virus (Nairovirus) of the Bunyaviridae family with a case fatality rate of 10 to 40 per cent. It added that the ticks, especially of the _Hyalomma_ genus, are both a reservoir and a vector for the CCHF while numerous wild and domestic animals such as cattle, buffaloes, goats and sheep are silent carriers of this virus, and the adult ticks feed on these animals.The notice said that although Balochistan remains the most affected province, cases have been reported from almost all parts of the country.During 2016, out of 101 confirmed cases, 33 patients died. During 2017, till date, a total of 41 confirmed cases have been reported including 16 from Balochistan, 15 from Punjab, 7 from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) and 3 from FATA.The advisory notice said that the virus is transmitted to the people either through tick bites or through contact with the infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughtering them. Public health workers along with animal herders, veterinarians, para-veterinary staff, livestock workers, animal merchants, butchers and slaughterhouse workers are at risk of the disease. Apart from the above mentioned, people close to or taking care of a suspected patient, and individuals involved in burial practices are also at a risk of getting infected, it added. There is currently no vaccine available for humans and the only way to reduce infection is by raising awareness.The notice further added that public health advice should focus on several aspects including wearing protective clothing -- such as long sleeves and trousers. People should be advised to wear light coloured clothes during a visit to the animal market to allow easy detection of ticks, and to regularly examine clothing and skin for ticks and if found, removing them safely and using approved repellents on clothing and skin.Similarly, citizens have been asked not to crush the ticks, wear gloves and other protective clothing while handling animals or their tissues, notably during slaughtering, butchering and culling procedures in slaughterhouses or at home. They have also been asked to avoid close physical contact with infected people, wearing gloves and protective equipment when taking care of them. People are also asked to wash hands frequently during caring or after visiting a patient.The notice stated that insect repellents are the most effective in warding off ticks in human populations.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The National Institute of Health Pakistan has issued this CCHF advisory notice in view of the upcoming Eid Ul Adha, when large numbers of livestock and cattle are moved from rural areas to urban markets for sale and subsequent slaughter.More spatial repellent products are becoming commercially available. These products, containing active ingredients such as metofluthrin and allethrin, augment aerosol insecticide sprays, vaporizing mats, and mosquito coils, which have been available for some time. Such products can help to clear rooms or areas of mosquitoes (spray aerosols) or repel mosquitoes from a circumscribed area (coils, spatial repellents). Although many of these products appear to have repellent or insecticidal activity under particular conditions, they have not yet been adequately evaluated in peer-reviewed studies for their efficacy in preventing vectorborne disease. Travelers should supplement the use of these products with repellent on skin or clothing and using bed nets in areas where vectorborne diseases are a risk or biting arthropods are noted [<https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2018/the-pre-travel-consultation/protection-against-mosquitoes-ticks-other-arthropods>].CDC has evaluated information published in peer-reviewed scientific literature and data available from EPA to identify several types of EPA-registered products that provide repellent activity sufficient to help people reduce the bites of disease-carrying mosquitoes. Products containing the following active ingredients typically provide reasonably long-lasting protection: - DEET (chemical name: N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide or N,N-diethyl-3-methyl-benzamide). Products containing DEET include, but are not limited to, Off!, Cutter, Sawyer, and Ultrathon. - Picaridin (KBR 3023 [Bayrepel] and icaridin outside the US; chemical name: 2-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperidinecarboxylic acid 1-methylpropyl ester). Products containing picaridin include, but are not limited to, Cutter Advanced, Skin So Soft Bug Guard Plus, and Autan (outside the US). - Oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE) or PMD (chemical name: para-menthane-3,8-diol), the synthesized version of OLE. Products containing OLE and PMD include, but are not limited to, Repel and Off ! Botanicals. This recommendation refers to EPA-registered products containing the active ingredient OLE (or PMD). ""Pure"" oil of lemon eucalyptus (essential oil not formulated as a repellent) is not recommended; it has not undergone similar, validated testing for safety and efficacy and is not registered with EPA as an insect repellent. - IR3535 (chemical name: 3-[N-butyl-N-acetyl]-aminopropionic acid, ethyl ester). Products containing IR3535 include, but are not limited to, Skin So Soft Bug Guard Plus Expedition and SkinSmart. - 2-undecanone (chemical name: methyl nonyl ketone). The product BioUD contains 2-undecanone.Published data indicate that repellent efficacy and duration of protection vary considerably among products and among mosquito and tick species. Product efficacy and duration of protection are also markedly affected by ambient temperature, level of activity, amount of perspiration, exposure to water, abrasive removal, and other factors. In general, higher concentrations of active ingredient provide longer duration of protection, regardless of the active ingredient. Products with less than 10 per cent active ingredient may offer only limited protection, often 1-2 hours. Products that offer sustained-release or controlled-release (microencapsulated) formulations, even with lower active ingredient concentrations, may provide longer protection times. Studies suggest that concentrations of DEET above approximately 50 per cent do not offer a marked increase in protection time against mosquitoes; DEET efficacy tends to plateau at a concentration of about 50 per cent. CDC recommends using products with  at least 20 per cent DEET on exposed skin to reduce biting by ticks that may spread disease.DEET-containing repellents prevent both mosquito and tick bites. Health Canada recommends using a product containing no more than 10 per cent DEET for children up to 12 years of age. However, products with a DEET concentration of 10 per cent or less should not be used for exposures lasting longer than 1 h to 2 h because they may not be effective in preventing tick bites. For children over 12 years of age and adults, a repellent containing up to 30 per cent DEET can be used as recommended on the product label. In the United States, 30 per cent DEET is approved for children aged 2 months of age and older. Reapplication of DEET is indicated only if the estimated protection period has passed and a significant risk of arthropod bites remains. Adverse events from DEET are rare. Contact dermatitis and eye irritation are the commonest side effects. Toxic encephalopathy has been reported, usually with prolonged or excessive use, or occasional DEET ingestion [<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4173961/pdf/pch-19-326.pdf>].Permethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid , is highly effective both as an insecticide and as a repellent. It is not licensed to be used as a topical repellent but can be sprayed on clothing (mesh jackets, hats, shoes) bed nets and camping gear to repel and kill ticks, mosquitoes and other insects. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/941>.]
