International Business Times [edited]<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/leading-uk-supermarket-may-have-infected-thousands-people-pig-virus-1635815>Thousands of British pork lovers may already be infected by a strain of hepatitis transmitted by some products which are imported and being sold at a leading UK supermarket, according to fresh analysis compiled by scientists from Public Health England (PHE). Experts traced the shopping habits of 60 infected people to a form of own-brand sausages from a retailer known only as ""supermarket X"". The British government has declined to name the specific shop, but multiple sources reportedly told The Sunday Times that it was Tesco.The strain, hepatitis E, is typically found in pork products imported into the UK from Europe. According to the PHE website, signs of the disease in humans vary from no symptoms to liver failure. In rare cases, it can prove fatal, particularly in pregnant women. This week (20 Aug 2017), the Sunday Times reported that research completed back in 2016 was withheld from publication until now over alleged ""sensitivity"".Scientists believe that imported pork products infect 150 000-200 000 British citizens a year. The paper said: ""The implicated products are pork sausages, which require cooking prior to consumption, and ready-to-eat pre-packed sliced ham."" It noted that ""Only supermarket X, especially own brand, was significantly associated with [the virus].""Tesco has not commented on the findings, but told The Sunday Times that it had already started a conversation with the Food Standards Agency (FSA) about how to minimize the spread of such viruses. ""The association with the supermarket does not infer any blame,"" PHE said.One scientist, professor Richard Tedder of the government's National Infection Service agency, agreed. ""Something appears to have changed in animal husbandry so too many pigs are infected at slaughter. This is a problem for meat producers and all retailers, not just one.""Person to person transmission of the virus is very rare, however it has been known to pass on via blood transfusions, PHE has said. The numbers of confirmed hepatitis E cases and infections increased significantly between 2010 and 2016, it warned. According to a report on PigWorld [<http://tinyurl.com/yd4fd34r>], a spokesperson from the National Pig Association (NPA) acknowledged the sudden spike in cases but said that ""further research and surveillance"" was required to ""determine the true cause of the rise in hepatitis E cases in the UK."" The statement continued: ""NPA recommends that consumers follow the advice from the Food Standards Agency that pork and sausages should be cooked thoroughly until steaming hot throughout, with no pink or red in the center, to greatly reduce the risk of infection.""[byline: Jason Murdock]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The publication cited is:Said B, Usdin M, Warburton F, et al. Pork products associated with human infection caused by an emerging phylotype of hepatitis E virus in England and Wales. Epidemiol Infect. 2017; 145(12): 2417-23. doi: 10.1017/S0950268817001388. Epub 2017 Jul 31; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28756783>--------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------""Since 2010, human hepatitis E infections have increased in England and Wales. Most cases are locally acquired and caused by hepatitis E virus genotype 3 (HEV G3). HEV G3 is linked to the consumption of pork products. The increase is associated with the emergence of a new phylotype, HEV G3-group 2 (G3-2, also known as G3abcdhij). 60 individuals with confirmed hepatitis E infection and no history of travel outside the UK were recruited: 19 were infected with HEV G3-group 1 (G3-1 or G3efg) and 41 with G3-2. Epidemiological data relating to usual shopping habits and consumption of ham and sausages were analysed together with typing data to identify any associations with HEV phylotype. Study participants who purchased ham and/or sausage from a major supermarket were more likely to have HEV G3-2 infection (relative risks 1.85, P = 0åá06, CI 0åá97-3åá53). The HEV G3-2 phylotype has not been detected in indigenous UK pigs and it is suggested that human infections could be the result of consumption of products made from pork originating outside the UK. This does not infer blame on the supermarket but the epidemiology of HEV is dynamic and reflects complex animal husbandry practices which need to be explored further.""This report underscores the importance of zoonotic hepatitis E (primarily genotype 3) as the cause of hepatitis E emergence in Europe. There are currently 7 genotypes of HEV and genotypes 1 and 2 are not zoonotic and cause most of the HEV infections in Africa and Asia. It is these genotypes that cause increased morbidity and mortality in pregnant women. Most of the zoonotic hepatitis E cases have been recognized in the developed world, are associated with foodborne disease (usually undercooked pork products) and are caused by genotype 3. In addition, infection with genotype 3 when occurring in immunocompromised hosts (especially solid organ transplant recipients) can cause chronic infection which can progress to cirrhosis. Ribavirin has been used to treat such individuals with chronic infection.The author's summary of their work states ""Study participants who purchased ham and/or sausage from a major supermarket were more likely to have HEV G3-2 infection (Relative risks 1.85, P = 0åá06, CI 0åá97-3åá53)"" although the posting above quotes the paper (?in the full text which is not available to this moderator) as ""Only supermarket X, especially own brand, was significantly associated with [the virus]."" The statistics noted in the summary gives a relative risk of 1.85 which supports an increased risk of almost 2 times but the p value of 0.06 and a confidence interval overlapping 1.0 both do not reach statistical significance so ""more likely"" is better than ""significantly associated"". Be that as it may, there is no doubt that acquisition of zoonotic HEV in Europe is clearly linked to ingestion of undercooked pork products that was carrying the virus. Adequate cooking and appropriate kitchen practices to avoid cross-contamination will minimize, if not erase totally, this risk. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>.]
