The Packer [edited]<http://www.thepacker.com/news/fda-sprout-program-halts-outbreak-leads-recalls>The United States' Food and Drug Administration's 2-year sampling program for sprouts has produced both enforcement actions -- prompting 6 product recalls and helping stop an outbreak of listeriosis -- and long-term insights on the prevalence of pathogens on sprout seeds and finished product.The FDA's ""fiscal year 2014-16 microbiological sampling assignment summary report: sprouts"" collected and tested sprouts as part of a ""proactive and preventive approach"" to help protect food safety, according to the report. Samples were tested for salmonella, _Listeria monocytogenes_, and _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7. Collecting 825 samples of domestic product, virtually all fresh sprouts eaten in the United States are grown in the USA, the sampling program tested sprout seeds, fresh sprouts, and spent irrigation water, according to the summary.FDA's sprout sampling program found:- salmonella was found in 0.21 per cent of the sprouts, 2.35 per cent of seeds and 0.54 per cent of used irrigation water;- _L. monocytogenes_ was in 1.28 per cent of the tested sprouts, similar to the percentage found in seeds and used irrigation water;- no sprouts/spent irrigation water tested positive for _E. coli_ O157:H7. Seeds weren't tested for that strain due to limitations associated with the test method;- samples with pathogens were from a small number of companies, with positives at 8 (8.5 per cent) of the 94 sprouting operations tested;According to the summary, many firms still have progress to make in sprout safety. ""The fact that the agency found multiple positive samples at some of these operations underscores the need for sprouting operations to comply with the agency's Produce Safety Regulation (published November 2015), which seeks to prevent outbreaks of foodborne illness and improve sprout safety,"" according to the report.During the testing process, the FDA worked with firms that owned or released the sprouts/seeds to conduct recalls or to have the product destroyed, and then followed up with inspections. The sampling program helped stop a listeriosis outbreak before it spread beyond a few cases, and it also prompted 6 recalls.While no large-scale testing of sprouts is planned, the FDA will determine if more sampling is needed. Criteria include whether a firm has a history of uncorrected contamination and observations from food safety inspectors who visit the facilities, according to the report. ""The presence of harmful bacteria in the commodity remains a concern to the agency in view of the history of reported outbreaks associated with sprouts, including 5 in 2016, and the fact that this assignment resulted in 6 product recalls,"" it said.[byline: Tom Karst]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The report ""FY 2014-2016 microbiological sampling assignment summary report: sprouts"" from the FDA's Office of Compliance, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition can be found at <https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/ComplianceEnforcement/Sampling/UCM566981.pdf>.""Executive summary------------------""The FDA set out to collect and test sprouts in 2014 as part of a new proactive and preventive approach to deploying its sampling resources with the ultimate goal of keeping contaminated food from reaching consumers.""The new approach, detailed in the Background section of this report (page 4 [available at the URL above]), centers on the testing of a statistically determined number of samples of targeted foods over a relatively short period of time, 12 to 18 months, to ensure a statistically valid amount of data is available for decision making. This approach helps the agency determine if there are common factors -- such as origin, season, or variety -- associated with pathogen findings.""The FDA issued the sprouts assignment in January 2014 under its new sampling model. The assignment targeted sprouts at 3 points in the production process (seeds, finished product, and spent irrigation water), with the aim of collecting and testing 1600 samples to determine the prevalence of select pathogens in the commodity. As background, the FDA designed its sampling plan such that if contamination of one per cent or greater was present in the commodity, the agency would detect it. The FDA monitored the assignment closely to gather lessons learned and make changes to its sampling procedures if needed to address trends or food safety issues. About one year into the assignment, the FDA decided to stop its collection and testing at 825 samples because it had already collected samples on more than one occasion from many of the sprouting operations known to the agency and its state partners. The sample set acquired was sufficient for the FDA to estimate the bacterial prevalences in the commodity with a 95 percent confidence interval of 0 per cent to 2 per cent for a one percent contamination rate.""The FDA tested only domestically grown sprouts for this assignment because virtually all sprouts eaten in the United States are grown domestically due to the commodity's delicate nature and relatively short shelf-life. Of note, the industry features a preponderance of relatively small operations.""The FDA tested the sprout samples for 3 pathogens: salmonella, _Listeria monocytogenes_, and _E. coli_ O157:H7. Based on the test results, the FDA found the prevalence of salmonella in the finished product sprouts to be 0.21 per cent. The agency also found that the prevalence of salmonella in seeds (2.35 per cent) was significantly higher than in finished product (0.21 per cent) and in spent irrigation water (0.54 per cent). Based on the test results, the FDA found the prevalence of _L. monocytogenes_ in the finished product to be 1.28 per cent. There was no significant difference in the prevalence of _L. monocytogenes_ based on point in the production process. None of the samples tested positive for _E. coli_ O157:H7. The agency did not test seed for _E. coli_ O157:H7 due to limitations associated with the test method.""Among the FDA's other findings, the agency found most of the positive samples at a small number of sprouting operations. Specifically, the FDA found violative samples at eight (8.5 per cent) of the 94 sprouting operations visited for purposes of this assignment. The fact that the agency found multiple positive samples at some of these operations underscores the need for sprouting operations to comply with the agency's Produce Safety Regulation (published November 2015), which seeks to prevent outbreaks of foodborne illness and improve sprout safety.""To address the positive samples, the FDA worked with the firms that owned or released the affected product to conduct voluntary recalls or to have their consignees destroy it, and then followed up with inspections. Of particular note, this sampling assignment helped detect and stop an outbreak of listeriosis while it still entailed a small number of cases, as described in the public health Impact section of this report (page 14 [available at the URL above]). This assignment also prompted 6 product recalls.""The FDA will continue to consider microbial contamination of sprouts and how best to reduce it. Such contamination remains a concern to the FDA given the aforementioned outbreak and the recalls initiated. Going forward, the FDA intends to inspect sprouting operations to ensure they are complying, as applicable, with the Produce Safety Rule, which includes new requirements for sprouts growers. The agency has no plans to conduct additional large-scale sampling of sprouts at this time but may sample the commodity in accordance with its longstanding approach to food sampling, which centers on (but is not limited to) the following criteria:- a firm has a previous history of unmitigated microbial contamination in the environment (such as, human illness, recalled or seized product, previous inspectional history, or environmental pathogens without proper corrective actions by the facility), or- inspectional observations that warrant collection of samples for microbiological analyses."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
