G1 [in Portuguese, machine trans., edited]<http://g1.globo.com/to/tocantins/noticia/vaqueiro-que-cuidava-de-cavalo-sacrificado-por-mormo-pode-ter-sido-infectado.ghtml>The cowboy working on the farm where a case of glanders was confirmed in a horse [PRO/PORT Mormo - Brazil (02) (TO), equine, confirmed 20170823.5270939], is also suspected to have the disease. The information was passed on by the secretary of health of Palmeirante [Tocantins state], Beatriz Ferreira. She noted that examinations have already been made and that steps are being taken to ensure that the disease does not spread. The cowboy's family has been examined, but no one besides him has symptoms of the disease. The main indicators of glanders are fever, skin lesions, nose bumps, and pneumonia. The disease is difficult to treat and can be fatal.The cowboy was referred to the Municipal Hospital of Colinas do Tocantins for tests, but was not admitted. The G1 tried to contact the city hall to ask what the deadline for the outcome was, but the calls were not answered. The farm where the infected horse was isolated and the animal was sacrificed. The neighboring properties are being inspected by Adapec [AgÌ»ncia de Defesa AgropecuÌÁria; Agency of Farming Defense].--communicated by:ProMED-PORT<promed-port@promedmail.org>[Glanders is an infection caused by _Burkholderia mallei_ and occurs primarily in horses and related animals. It is rare in humans. It is unclear what symptoms occurred in the person and how the diagnosis was made.The following appears to be the most recent review of _B. mallei_ infections in humans including the description of disease manifestations:Van Zandt KE, Greer MT, Gelhaus HC. Glanders: an overview of infection in humans. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Sep 3;8:131. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-131 (the full text and citations can be found at the original URL <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3766238/>).""Features of human clinical glanders------------------------------------""General symptoms""Many forms of glanders have been described, including chronic, disseminated, pulmonary, and septicemic. The variety of infections is largely explained by various routes of infection. Localized infections are generally regionally confined and typically characterized by foci of suppuration. The abscesses can ulcerate and drain for long periods of time. However, localized infections may disseminate, leading to pulmonary, septicemic, or multi-tissue infection [9]. The most common clinical features of the eight laboratory-acquired infections from Fort Detrick included (in order of most common occurrence) afternoon to evening low-grade fever, malaise, fatigue, headache, myalgias including backache, lymphadenopathy, and chest pain. Approximately half of the patients not only felt better but were also clinically better for a period of time after the first wave of disease symptoms. This period lasted from a few days to 2 months then patients developed clinical signs of infection.""Mucosal involvement""Involvement of the eye and conjunctiva in a _B. mallei_ infection presents with excessive lacrimation and photophobia. Nasal involvement is characterized by inflammation and swelling of the nose, which is common following inhalation of _B. mallei_. This may be followed by copious nasal discharge. Additionally, infection may invade the nasal septum and bony tissues, causing fistulae and tissue destruction [9]. The face may swell and regional lymph nodes may become inflamed. Infection may also extend lower in the respiratory tract, resulting in bronchitis which can be accompanied by cough and mucopurulent sputum production. Constitutional signs and symptoms such as fever and chills typically occur within the first few days following infection. Additionally, these symptoms may persist through treatment and be severe. Common signs and symptoms can include, but are not limited to, fever or low-grade fever in the afternoon to evening; chills with or without rigors; and severe headache [9].""Cutaneous involvement""Cutaneous manifestations include papular lesions that may erupt anywhere on the body with a more chronic, indolent course of infection. _B. mallei_ entry through an abrasion is typically followed by an inflammatory response, including pain and swelling. In these cases, a glanders node may appear as a single blister, gradually developing into an ulcer that may become hemorrhagic [18,35]. A localized infection with a discharge typically develops at the entry site. Inflammation may extend along regional lymphatics and cause lymphangitis with numerous foci of suppuration along their course. The endotoxins present in _B. mallei_ strains affect the smooth muscle of the lymphatics [9] by enhancing the irritation and inflammation seen in the lymphatics.""Pulmonary involvement""A pulmonary infection typically results in pneumonia, pulmonary abscess, pleuritis, and plural effusion. Signs and symptoms of pulmonary infection can include cough, dyspnea, chest pain, and mucoplurent sputum. Nonspecific signs and symptoms such as fatigue, fever (often exceeding 102 deg F [38.9 deg C]), chills, headache, myalgias, lymphangitis, sore throat, pleuritic chest pain, cough, tachypnea, dyspnea, discharge, and gastrointestinal signs often accompany respiratory infections [9]. Many symptoms may take up to 2 to 3 weeks to develop. Nonspecific signs, such as dizziness, rigors, myalgia, nausea, night sweats, severe headache, tachycardia, weight loss, and mucosal eruptions are also usually present and may indicate a disseminated infection [9].""Dissemination of infection""Dissemination from local cutaneous or mucosal infection result in septicemia and the colonization of internal organs such as the spleen, liver, and lungs with the development of abscesses [9]. Ultrasonography and computed tomography may reveal multiple, small discrete abscesses in both the liver and the kidney [23]. These infections are typically associated with septic shock and high mortality.""This publication describes what seems to have been the last of the cases of human _B. mallei_ in the USA:Srinivasan A, Kraus CN, DeShazer D, et al. Glanders in a military research microbiologist. N Engl J Med. 2001; 345: 256-8; (full text and citations can be found at the original URL <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM200107263450404>""Infection with _Burkholderia mallei_ (formerly _Pseudomonas mallei_) can cause a subcutaneous infection known as farcy or can disseminate to cause the condition known as glanders. In humans, acute infection with _B. mallei_ is characterized by necrosis of the tracheobronchial tree, pustular skin lesions, and either a febrile pneumonia, if the organism was inhaled, or signs of sepsis and multiple abscesses, if the skin was the portal of entry (1). At the turn of the 20th century, glanders was an important cause of death among horses, and there were secondary, often fatal, infections in humans (2). Because of the lethal and contagious nature of the disease, _B. mallei_ was considered an ideal agent for biologic warfare and was used for this purpose by Germany in World War I (3).""Aggressive control measures essentially eliminated glanders from the West. However, with the resurgent concern about biologic warfare, _B. mallei_ is now being studied in laboratories worldwide. We describe here the first reported case of human glanders in the USA in more than 50 years and discuss some of the important events in the history of the disease and its initial eradication.""Case report------------""In March 2000, tender, left axillary adenopathy and fever (temperature, 38.6 deg C [101.5 deg F]) developed in a 33 year old microbiologist at the US Army Medical Research Institute for Infectious Diseases who had type 1 diabetes mellitus. The patient had worked for 2 years investigating the basic microbiology of _B. mallei_ and did not routinely wear latex gloves. The adenopathy and fever persisted despite treatment for 10 days with a first-generation cephalosporin. An evaluation after this treatment, which included chest radiography as well as cultures of blood and urine, was unrevealing. During the next few weeks, the patient had increasing fatigue, night sweats, malaise, rigors, and weight loss.""In early April [2000], his symptoms and adenopathy resolved during a 10-day course of clarithromycin, but he relapsed 4 days after the medication was stopped. On 2 May 2000, he was admitted to his local hospital with diabetic ketoacidosis. A computed tomographic (CT) scan showed multiple hepatic and splenic abscesses.""On 4 May 2000, respiratory distress requiring mechanical ventilation developed, and the patient was transferred to Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. Physical examination revealed a temperature of 40.3 deg C [104.5 deg F] and a heart rate of 122 beats per minute. The patient had a grade 2/6 systolic murmur, coarse breath sounds, and moderate epigastric tenderness. Laboratory studies showed a white-cell count of 8300 per cubic millimeter, with 83 per cent neutrophils, 9 per cent monocytes, and 8 per cent lymphocytes. The hematocrit was 25.6 per cent. The concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase were 53 U per liter and 56 U per liter, respectively, and the alkaline phosphatase was 197 IU per liter. Cultures of the patient's blood and a sample from a fine-needle aspiration biopsy of a liver abscess grew a small, bipolar, weakly staining, gram-negative rod that was identified by an automated bacterial-identification system as _Pseudomonas fluorescens_ or _P. putida_. However, gas-liquid chromatography of the cellular fatty acids (Microbial ID, Newark, Del.) placed the organism in the genus _Burkholderia_. Subsequent phenotypic testing and 16S ribosomal RNA gene-sequence analysis identified the organism as _B. mallei_. Initial susceptibility testing showed the isolate to be sensitive to imipenem, ceftazidime, and tetracycline.""The patient was treated with imipenem and doxycycline, and there was rapid improvement. After two weeks, the imipenem was replaced by azithromycin, and the patient completed a six-month course of treatment with azithromycin and doxycycline. Although the organism was found retrospectively to be relatively resistant to azithromycin, a CT scan obtained after six months of treatment showed substantial improvement of the liver and spleen abscesses, and one year later the patient remained in good health.""Discussion-----------This is the 1st reported human case of glanders in the English-language medical literature since 1949 (4) and it occurred in the context of research on agents of biologic warfare.""Glanders may have been the first biologic weapon of the 20th century. During World War I, Germany had a program of biologic sabotage against several countries, including the United States, whereby cultures of _B. mallei_ and anthrax were distributed to undercover agents who attempted to infect livestock that were to be shipped to Allied countries (3). The intention was both the destruction of livestock and the transmission of the highly contagious, lethal agent from livestock to humans. It is currently suspected that attempts are being made to develop an aerosolized form of antibiotic-resistant _B. mallei_ that could become a biologic weapon as potent as anthrax.""Glanders, an important human and veterinary disease, was eliminated without a vaccine or effective treatment. It appears to have been abolished by the veterinary use of a skin test to detect exposure to B. mallei combined with draconian agricultural measures to control infection (5).""At the turn of the 20th century, Canada, Britain, and the USA all implemented glanders-control programs. By that time, the symptoms of equine glanders, which include fever and inflammation of the nasal mucosa with ultimate necrosis and obstruction of the oropharynx, had been well described (6). Laws were passed that required notification of the health department and the immediate slaughter of affected animals, with proper disposal of the carcasses. In addition, all horses on the premises where the infected horses were found had to be tested with the mallein skin test for exposure to _B. mallei_; any horses with a reaction also had to be slaughtered. Horses with no reaction were quarantined and then retested two to three weeks later. Furthermore, the equine contacts of the horses were traced to track down other horses that might have been exposed and then moved to other facilities.""The case we describe illustrates the major clinical features of glanders, which can usually be traced to direct contact with _B. mallei_, as in workers exposed to animals with glanders (7) and in personnel who were exposed in laboratories during World War II (8). Although the patient discussed here could not recall a clear break in his skin or an accident in the laboratory, most reported occupational infections occur without recognized instances of exposure (9). As Robins commented in 1906, ""It is perhaps not advisable to be too dogmatic as to the invariable necessity of an abrasion being present in every case of human glanders . . . [as] in several such cases of our series it is distinctly stated that there was no abrasion."" (7). As in our patient, _B. mallei_ often enters the body through the hand or arm. After an incubation period lasting between a few days and several weeks, local suppuration and regional lymphadenopathy occur. Constitutional symptoms often accompany the infection, with fever, rigors, and malaise predominating. If the infection is left untreated, abscesses in the lymph nodes will generally form, then break down and drain.""Dissemination of the infection occurs 1 to 4 weeks after infection of the lymph nodes. Abscesses can be widespread, and _B. mallei_ can infect almost any tissue (7). Abscesses in the liver and the spleen, as were seen in our patient, appear to be relatively common, as does pulmonary involvement, including consolidation, abscesses, and pleural nodules. The acute onset and rapid resolution of the respiratory failure in our patient were more consistent with the respiratory distress syndrome associated with gram-negative bacteremia than with that associated with pulmonary glanders. Subcutaneous and intramuscular abscesses sometimes develop as well (7).""There are few data regarding the antibiotic treatment of glanders, since the disease had largely disappeared by the time antibiotics became available. In vitro, ceftazidime, gentamicin, imipenem, doxycycline, and ciprofloxacin all have reliable activity against _B. mallei_ (10), and our patient's infection responded well to a combination of imipenem and doxycycline. Experimentally induced glanders also responds to a combination of sulfazine and trimethoprim (11). However, treatment of the disease in the setting of bioterrorism may be more difficult if the organism is drug-resistant.""This case demonstrates the difficulties that microbiology laboratories may have in recognizing potential agents of biologic warfare. These microbes are rarely encountered and may be misidentified by conventional, phenotypic identification systems. Techniques such as cellular analysis of fatty acid and 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing can be used to identify the organisms correctly, but these tests are not widely available.""Finally, this case may serve as a harbinger of the resurgence of nearly forgotten diseases such as glanders, plague, smallpox, and anthrax. Research on these diseases is now being conducted in more laboratories, which increases the risk of occupational exposure. There is also the looming threat that some group will eventually mount a successful campaign of bioterrorism. Resources must be allocated both to prevent and to prepare for these frightening possibilities.""Maps of Brazil can be seen at <http://s13.postimg.org/jumnalk87/map_of_Brazil.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/62881>. The state of Tocantins is located in central Brazil. - Mod.LL]
