ABC Fox Montana [edited]<http://www.kfbb.com/story/36210094/brucellosis-found-in-madison-county-herd>Brucellosis has been found in a heifer within Montana's Designated Surveillance Area (DSA), according to the Montana Department of Livestock. The infected animal was first identified during voluntary herd testing on a Madison County ranch. Infection was confirmed by the National Veterinary Services Laboratory (NVSL) in Ames, Iowa (IA) by tissue culture following euthanasia of the animal. The ranch has been placed under quarantine and the department has initiated an epidemiological investigation. Testing of all other animals on the ranch is already under way.""This animal previously tested negative in December of 2016, indicating this is a recent infection,"" said state veterinarian, Marty Zaluski. ""Because of the continued risk of transmission from positive elk in the DSA, we expect transmission to domestic cattle or bison to occasionally occur.""Producers with cattle or bison in the DSA are subject to increased identification and testing requirements. ""Through the significant efforts of veterinarians and producers, we are able to find these cases early and within the boundaries of our DSA, thus protecting our state as well as our trading partners,"" Zaluski said.This is the 9th herd found to be affected by brucellosis since the DSA was created in 2010. In all 3 Greater Yellowstone Area states, elk have been determined to be the likely source of infection in livestock. The disease investigation and pending results from genetic fingerprinting (genotyping) of the cultured bacteria will help the department better understand the source of infection in this case.The mission of the Montana Department of Livestock is to control and eradicate animal diseases, prevent the transmission of animal diseases to humans, and to protect the livestock industry from theft and predatory animals. For more information on the Montana Department of Livestock, visit <www.liv.mt.gov>.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This article is referring to the bacterium _Brucella abortus_. The infectious disease can affect humans, wildlife and domestic animals, including dogs. Historically, cattle have been the primary carriers but as states move more into close interaction with wildlife, such as the Greater Yellowstone area, or with managing cervids and buffalo, the carrier in a particular area may not necessarily be cattle. This article states that it may be the elk. Other wildlife carriers include bison, reindeer, caribou and feral swine.Large animals, especially elk and bison may have no obvious signs of the disease. The brucella bacterium collects in the lymphatic system, the udder and the reproductive tract. Abortion is a sign of the disease. Other signs in animals may include retained placenta, swollen testicles, reduced pregnancy rates, decreased milk production and swollen, painful joints.In humans this disease is known by several names, including Malta fever, Mediterranean fever and undulant fever. Humans may acquire the disease through assisting an infected animal in the birthing process, examining an aborted fetus without protection, drinking unpasteurized milk or other dairy products, through an open wound, or even intact skin, or a slash of infected body fluids into the eyes, nose or mouth. Slaughter workers, and veterinarians are at risk because of the nature of their jobs. Consumption of infected raw meat by humans may also be a source of infection, however if the meat is properly cooked it does not present a disease risk.When a person is infected clinical signs and symptoms may include, fever, body aches, anorexia, lethargy, weakness, fatigue as well as swollen lymph nodes and possibly enlargement of the spleen and liver. Symptoms may develop over several weeks or months, or even immediately. Joints, bones, and especially the spine may be painful. Other joints such as ankles, hips, knees and shoulders may be swollen, warm, and painful.The DSA has had problems with this disease before and therefore this disease was likely caught quite early. - Mod.TGThe state of Montana can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/228>. A county map of Montana, with Madison located in the south west, can be seen at <http://geology.com/county-map/montana-county-map.gif>. - CopyEd.AO]
