The Nation, Thailand portal [edited]<http://www.nationmultimedia.com/detail/national/30325078> People living in flooded areas have been warned to keep time spent wading through water to a minimum lest they be infected with melioidosis, a disease that has claimed 21 lives in 2017. Department of Disease Control (DDC) chief Dr Jessada Chokdamrongsuk reported on [Mon 28 Aug 2017], that 1978 cases of melioidosis had been reported from [1 Jan 2017] to [22 Aug 2017].The disease, caused by the bacterium _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ and prevalent during the rainy season in the subtropics, peaks every August in Thailand and has been wider spread this year [2017], he said. ""The bacterium thrives in contaminated water and soil and infects humans and animals through direct contact. People could get infected from prolonged exposure to contaminated water or soil, especially if they have any open sores or lesions in the skin,"" Jessada said. ""Infection can also come from consuming contaminated water or food.""Melioidosis produces a variety of acute and severe symptoms, he said, including long-lasting fever with no other apparent cause, ulcers or abscesses in the lungs, liver or spleen, and blood infections. The disease, which mainly affects adults, can be fatal, he said. Death has been known to result within 2-3 days of admission to hospital.Risk factors for infection include chronic respiratory and lung disease, tuberculosis, diabetes, chronic renal disease, thalassemia, cancer, and immune-suppressing conditions unrelated to HIV. Jessada advised people coming into regular contact with floodwater to wear boots, drink only water that has been boiled, avoid raw and partially cooked food, wash immediately after exposure and seek medical attention if a fever persists for more than 5 days or abscesses become chronic.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Melioidosis is a disease of the rainy season in its endemic areas. It mainly affects people who have direct contact with soil and water. Many have an underlying predisposing condition such as diabetes (commonest risk factor), renal disease, cirrhosis, thalassemia, alcohol dependence, immunosuppressive therapy, chronic obstructive lung disease, cystic fibrosis, and excess kava consumption. Kava is an herbal member of the pepper family that can be associated with chronic liver disease.Melioidosis may present at any age, but peaks in the 4th and 5th decades of life, affecting men more than women. In addition, although severe fulminating infection can and does occur in healthy individuals, severe disease and fatalities are much less common in those without risk factors.The most commonly recognized presentation of melioidosis is pneumonia, associated with high fever, significant muscle aches, chest pain, and -- although the cough can be nonproductive -- respiratory secretions can be purulent, significant in quantity, and associated with on-and-off bright, red blood. The lung infection can be rapidly fatal -- with bacteremia and shock -- or somewhat more indolent.Acute melioidosis septicemia is the most severe complication of the infection. It presents as a typical sepsis syndrome with hypotension, high cardiac output, and low systemic vascular resistance. In many cases, a primary focus in the soft tissues or lung can be found. The syndrome, usually in patients with risk factor comorbidities, is characteristically associated with multiple abscesses involving the cutaneous tissues, the lung, the liver, and spleen, and a very high mortality rate of 80 to 95 percent. With prompt optimal therapy, the case fatality rate can be decreased to 40 to 50 percent.The melioidosis bacillus is intrinsically insensitive to many antimicrobials. It should be noted that bioterrorism strains may be engineered to be even more resistant. _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ is usually inhibited by tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (SXT), antipseudomonal penicillins, carbapenems, ceftazidime, and amoxicillin/clavulanate or ampicillin/sulbactam. Ceftriaxone and cefotaxime have good in vitro activity but poor efficacy; and cefepime did not appear, as well, to be equivalent to ceftazidime in a mouse model. The unusual antimicrobial profile of resistance to colistin and polymyxin B and the aminoglycosides but sensitivity to amoxicillin/clavulanate is a useful tool to consider in treatment of infection with the organism.The randomized and quasi-randomized trials comparing melioidosis treatment have been reviewed, and it was found that the formerly standard therapy of chloramphenicol, doxycycline, and SXT combination had a higher mortality rate than therapy with ceftazidime, imipenem/cilastatin, or amoxicillin/clavulanate (or ampicillin/sulbactam). The betalactam-betalactamase inhibitor therapy, however, seemed to have a higher failure rate.Source: Tolaney P, Lutwick LI: Melioidosis. In: Lutwick LI, Lutwick SM (eds). Bioterror: the weaponization of infectious diseases. Totowa NJ: Humana Press, 2008 pp 145-58.For the microbiologists among our readers, a new (and 5th) member of the _B. pseudomallei_ complex has been described, _B. humptydooensis_ , from the Northern Territory of Australia and named after the small town of Humpty Doo near to where the isolate was found (Tuanyok A, Mayo M, Scholz H, et al: _Burkholderia humptydooensis_ sp. nov., a new species related to _Burkholderia thailandensis_ and the fifth member of the _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ complex. App Environ Microbiol 2017; 83(5): e02802-16); <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5311406/>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/151>.]
