County of San Diego Health and Human Services Agency [edited]<http://www.sandiegocounty.gov/content/sdc/hhsa/programs/phs/community_epidemiology/dc/Hepatitis_A.html>Since early 2017, the Public Health Services Division, in the County of San Diego Health and Human Services Agency, has been investigating a local hepatitis A outbreak. The majority of people who have contracted hepatitis A are homeless and/or illicit drug users, although some cases have been neither. The outbreak is being spread person-to-person and through contact with a fecally contaminated environment. No common sources of food, beverage or drugs have been identified that have contributed to this outbreak, though investigation is ongoing. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) notes that person-to-person transmission through close contact is the primary way people get hepatitis A in the USA.Vaccination efforts are being implemented in targeted locations by county staff and in collaboration with health care partners. Health providers are asked to inform the epidemiology program if they have a patient suspected to have hepatitis A infection before the patient leaves the emergency department or provider's office.San Diego county hepatitis A outbreak cases and deaths as of 29 Aug 2017-----------------------------Cases / Deaths / Hospitalizations378 / 15 (4%) / 263 (70%)The table does not include all reported hepatitis A cases in the county, only those that are local-outbreak related. Also, data are provisional and subject to change. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Expansion of HAV vaccinationDate: Mon 28 Aug 2017Source: County of San Diego Communications Office [edited]<https://www.eastcountymagazine.org/new-vaccination-recommendations-issued-hepatitis-outbreak>The ongoing hepatitis A outbreak in San Diego County has claimed 14 lives and hospitalized 264 people among the reported 352 cases.Approximately 70 percent of the cases have been among people who are homeless, use illicit drugs, or a combination of those 2 factors. The county has been increasing efforts to vaccinate these target populations as well as those who come in contact with them.The county's public health officer has now made recommendations that people who handle food get a vaccination for hepatitis A. ""This is a proactive recommendation because the ongoing outbreak means that the risk to the general public is higher than normal,"" said Wilma Wooten, MD, MPH, county public health officer. ""A person who becomes infected with hepatitis A may spread the disease to others before experiencing symptoms. In an occupation such as handling food, workers may expose more members of the public than workers in other occupations.""No common sources of food, beverage, or drugs have been identified that have contributed to this outbreak, although the investigation continues.Food handlers can get the vaccination from their occupational health provider, health care provider, or a local pharmacy that carries the vaccine. A prescription is not needed to get the vaccination. The vaccine is also available to uninsured or under-insured individuals for no cost at all county public health centers. For a list of locations, call 2-1-1 or visit SDIZ.org.The vaccine recommendation has also been expanded to those who work in health care in addition to prior recommendations for those who work in public safety, sanitation, homeless shelters and behavioral and homeless service providers. A hepatitis A vaccination is the best way to prevent the disease.HHSA is continuing to work with a wide range of community partners on a variety of strategies to offer vaccinations and deploy increased education efforts to people at risk for getting hepatitis A. Homeless service providers, treatment providers, faith-based community organizations and the Regional Task Force on Homeless are all helping notify high-risk individuals about the outbreak. Ads encouraging people get the hepatitis A vaccine have been placed in Metro Transit buses, trolleys and stops. The local medical community, including hospital emergency departments and community health clinics, and the county jail and probation facilities, have been helping administer vaccinations.Teams of public health nurses, often partnered with a community outreach worker or a member of law enforcement through the various Homeless Outreach Teams, are continuing to go into the community on ""foot teams"" to offer homeless people vaccinations.Hepatitis A is most commonly spread person-to-person through the fecal-oral route. Symptoms of hepatitis A include jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes), fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dark urine, and light-colored stools. Symptoms usually appear over a number of days and last less than 2 months. However, some people can be ill for as long as 6 months. Hepatitis A can sometimes cause liver failure and even death.Hepatitis A can also be prevented through good hygiene. Everyone should:- Wash their hands for 20 seconds (about the length of time to sing ""Happy Birthday"" twice) with soap and running water before eating and after using the restroom or changing a diaper.- Do not directly touch the door handle when exiting a public restroom.- Do not share food, drinks, or smoking materials with other people.[Byline: Tom Christensen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The number of cases of diagnosed hepatitis A (HAV) in San Diego County in southern California continues to increase.Date / Cases / Hospitalized (percentage) / Deaths (percentage)-----------------------------------5 Apr 2017 / 39 / 33 (85) / 1 (3)4 May 2017 / 80 / 66 (83) / 3 (4)31 May 2017 / 133 / 103 (80) / 3 (2)12 Jun 2017 / 160 / 120 (75) / 4 (2.5)27 Jun 2017 / 196 / 142 (72) / 4 (2)26 Jul 2017 / 275 / 194 (71) / 7 (2.5)1 Aug 2017 / 295 / 202 (68) / 10 (3.4)8 Aug 2017 / 312 / 215 (69) / 10 (3.2)15 Aug 2017 / 333 / 232 (70) / 11 (3.3)22 Aug 2017 / 352 / 246 (70) / 14 (4)29 Aug 2017 / 378 / 263 (70) / 15 (4)In the past week, 26 cases have been reported with 1 more death. Since many cases of HAV infection are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice), the total number of cases is likely to have been significantly higher. The epicurve published last week (Hepatitis A - USA (20): (CA) fatal 20170817.5256184) showed that the outbreak is continuing at a relatively stable rate of 15-20 new onset cases/week.The very high hospitalization rate may be related to the homelessness of the cohort but could represent a more virulent strain. HAV infection occurred in some individuals chronically infected with either hepatitis B or C, but it is not clear whether the deaths occurred in those individuals. Homelessness and illicit substance use seem to be relevant risk factors, while MSM [men who have sex with men] practices are not. It remains unclear how and from what vehicle the virus is spreading.The San Diego County government is now recommending hepatitis A vaccination for food handlers. The vaccine recommendation has also been expanded to those who work in health care in addition to prior recommendations for those who work in public safety, sanitation, homeless shelters and behavioral and homeless service providers.In 2014, a report regarding the possibility of routine HAV immunization for USA food handlers appeared in the lay press<https://www.hepmag.com/article/hav-vaccine-for-food-workers-25518-1691284701>):""Health Officials Urge Hepatitis A Vaccine for Food Workers------------------------------Federal regulators and health officials are now urging lawmakers to make it mandatory for all food handlers in the USA to be vaccinated against the hepatitis A virus (HAV), NBC News reports. The recommendation comes after a spate of restaurant warnings, which have put the disease back on the map as a potentially serious concern for public health.In April 2014, nearly 2000 people received immunoglobulin shots to prevent hepatitis A infections after restaurant workers in New York and South Carolina tested positive for the virus. In February 2014, a scare at a seafood restaurant in South Carolina prompted nearly 100 people to get immunized against the disease. Last September 2013, nearly 2000 people in the Bronx, New York had to receive preventative jabs after an infected food handler caused an HAV outbreak.For years, the CDC has said that food handlers didn't need hepatitis A shots because outbreaks of the disease have been relatively rare since an effective vaccine came out in 1996. However, health experts are beginning to see a gap among people in their 20s, 30s, 40s and 50s -- the demographic most likely to eat and work in restaurants -- who seemingly missed out on the preventative shot. New hepatitis A infections also seem to be on the rise in the USA over the past few years. The restaurant industry argues that giving out mandatory vaccines to all its workers would be difficult. The vaccine has to be given in 2 doses, months apart, for a person to get full immunity. Also, the cost of universal hepatitis A vaccinations to the companies could amount to USD 150-200 per worker.""No action appears to have been made on this issue as based on the latest recommendations: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older -- United States, 2017. MMWR 2017; 66(5):136-138 <https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6605e2.htm?s_cid=mm6605e2_w>).The latest formal statement that I could find on this issue is from CDC: Prevention of Hepatitis A Through Active or Passive Immunization: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2006;55(RR07):1-23 [the citations can be accessed at the original URL]:""Food-Service Establishments and Food Handlers----------------------------------Foodborne hepatitis A outbreaks are recognized relatively infrequently in the USA. Outbreaks typically are associated with contamination of food during preparation by an HAV-infected food handler; a single infected food handler can transmit HAV to dozens or even hundreds of persons (34,36,37,78--81). However, the majority of food handlers with hepatitis A do not transmit HAV. Food handlers are not at increased risk for hepatitis A because of their occupation. However, among the approximately 40 000 adults with hepatitis A reported during 1992--2000 for whom an occupation was known, 8% were identified as food handlers, reflecting the large number of persons employed in the food service industry (34). Evaluating HAV-infected food handlers is a common and labor-intensive task for public health departments. In a 1992 common-source outbreak involving 43 persons, the estimated total medical and disease control cost was approximately USD 800 000 (82).Outbreaks associated with food, especially green onions and other raw produce, that has been contaminated before reaching a food-service establishment have been recognized increasingly in recent years (29,30,83--88). Low attack rates are common, and outbreaks often have been recognized in association with a single restaurant in which no infected food handler was identified on subsequent investigation (29,83,88).""""Persons who work as food handlers can contract hepatitis A and potentially transmit HAV to others. One national economic analysis concluded that routine vaccination of all food handlers would not be economical from a societal or restaurant owner's perspective (197). Nonetheless, to decrease the frequency of evaluations of food handlers with hepatitis A and the need for postexposure prophylaxis of patrons, consideration may be given to vaccination of employees who work in areas where state and local health authorities or private employers determine that such vaccination is appropriate. Food handlers who receive hepatitis A vaccine should be provided with a record of the immunization. Those who do not should be informed of the signs and symptoms of hepatitis A and taught food preparation practices that reduce the risk for fecal contamination.""Given the increasing number of cases of hepatitis A in the USA, including ongoing large outbreaks in California and Michigan and the 2016 Hawaii outbreak from contaminated scallops that affected some food handlers, it may be time to readdress this issue. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
