Diario Aysen [in Spanish, trans. Mod.JG, edited]<https://goo.gl/8k5UZP>Last weekend, more than 20 children with severe respiratory symptoms were admitted to the Regional Hospital, and they were diagnosed with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection.During the last week, 2 3-year-old children with severe respiratory illness were admitted to the intensive care unit, and one of them was waiting to be referred to Puerto Montt.Therefore, with information updated until last Sat [26 Aug 2017], more than 30 children with RSV infection have been reported, and all of them are hospitalized in pediatrics, pediatric intensive care, and neonatal intensive care units. Meanwhile, because of the severity of their condition -- most of them being infants -- 7 children have been referred to hospitals in Santiago and Concepcion so they may receive adequate care, since Coyhaique Regional Hospital (CRH) does not have a pediatric intensive care unit (ICU).This is what Dr. Jaime Lopez-Quintana, Head of the CRH reported: ""This year [2017], RSV is behaving quite aggressively, and our adult intensive care unit is completely full with children. This is not an adequate condition for taking care of these children; this is not what our children in this region deserve,"" as he reported this situation to Ms. Gisela Alarcon-Rojas, Subsecretary of Healthcare Networks of the Chilean Ministry of Health, who verified the condition of children being taken care of in the (adult) ICU.So, with this complex situation, Dr. Lopez-Quintana added that specialists from important children referral centers, particularly from Dr. Luis Calvo-Mackenna and Dr. Exequiel Fernandez-Cortes hospitals, will soon arrive to this region. ""We hope to have for the next 2 weeks the support of pediatricians trained in intensive medicine who may help the team we have here in Coyhaique,"" emphasized Dr. Lopez-Quintana.According to information brought by the medical sub-direction from the Coyhaique Regional Hospital, the affected children are hospitalized in the following areas: pediatrics, neonatal intensive care unit, and (general) intensive care unit.There are 10 infants hospitalized in the pediatrics service, while another 11 children have already been discharged; so now there are 14 beds available. In the neonatal ICU, 7 children are hospitalized; 2 of them are severely ill, and the capacity of the unit is 2 beds; while in the general ICU, 6 infants are hospitalized, and there are 2 beds available.""With respect to bed availability, the hospital is still able to cope with the situation. However, a working overload for the personnel has been observed, so that extra personnel have been recruited to cover the work shifts,"" explained Dr. Joaquin Garcia-Gay, Medical Subdirector of the CRH.Also, Dr. Garcia-Gay explained that if a child develops a febrile illness, respiratory distress, intercostal retraction and malaise for 2 days, these are some of the symptoms that may indicate the presence of RSV, which mainly affects infants less than 2 years old.""So, if such symptoms occur, then the child must be brought to the Urgency Service. However, for those patients that develop mild respiratory symptoms, such as common cold or other similar conditions, it is preferable they are not brought to the Urgency Service, since they may be at risk for becoming infected with RSV from patients that are being hospitalized,"" the specialist advised.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[RSV is the most common cause of lower respiratory tract infections among young children worldwide. Most infants are infected before one year of age, and virtually everyone gets an RSV infection by 2 years of age.Each year, on average, in the United States, RSV leads to:- 57 527 hospitalizations among children younger than 5 years old- 2.1 million outpatient visits among children younger than 5 years old- 177 000 hospitalizations and 14 000 deaths among adults older than 65 years.In the United States and other areas with similar climates, RSV infections occur primarily during fall, winter, and spring <https://www.cdc.gov/rsv/research/us-surveillance.html>. It is currently winter in Chile.It is not clear what may have led to this current RSV outbreak in Chile. In 2001, an outbreak of RSV struck Santiago, Chile. 150 hospital admissions were registered daily during the height of the southern hemisphere winter. It was speculated that pollution may have played a role as Santiago is one of the world's most polluted cities. Chile's geography of surrounding mountains and heat inversions in winter dramatically increases the concentration of pollutants. Pollution leads to irritation of the respiratory tract making it more difficult for the immune system to respond to infections. (Excerpted from C Orellana. Respiratory syncytial virus outbreak in Chile. The Lancet Infec Dis. News desk. October 2001 DOI: <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(01)00088-3>). - Mod.LKA HealthMap of Chile may be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/7>/.]
