Irish Times [edited]<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/ireland/irish-news/blood-transfusion-found-to-have-infected-irish-patient-with-hepatitis-b-1.3203330>The Minister for Health and the Irish Blood Transfusion Service (IBTS) have moved to reassure the public after the first known infection of a patient in Ireland with hepatitis B from a routine blood transfusion. The IBTS said the infection occurred after the blood donation was made in the ""window period"" when the virus cannot be detected, even by the most sensitive tests available. The case is ""not an ongoing patient safety incident"" and could not be attributed to a testing failure, according to Minister for Health Simon Harris. ""This is a very rare situation which the IBTS is dealing with in a sensitive manner with the patient impacted.""Dr Stephen Field, IBTS medical and scientific director, described the incident as a ""rare, one in 2 million event"" with no implications for blood that will be transfused to patients in the future. He said the IBTS has tested 1.2 million donations to date and ""there has been no other confirmed transfusion transmitted infection of hepatitis B."" It is possible for infected blood to pass as negative for a period of about 15 days, according to Dr Field. Similar cases have arisen in the UK and other countries.The donated blood tested negative for the presence of hepatitis B before the transfusion, as the virus was not picked up by the screening equipment used. The IBTS said the incident ""represents a donation made in the window period when the presence of the virus cannot be consistently detected even by the most sensitive tests available.""The red blood cells from the donation were transfused into a patient during a medical procedure, which resulted in the patient later contracting hepatitis B -- a virus that infects the liver. The Health Service Executive became aware of the issue when the original blood donor tested positive for the Hepatitis B virus, and the IBTS was informed. The blood transfusion service then carried out a follow up test of an archived sample taken from the blood donor, using the same method and the blood sample came back negative for the presence of hepatitis B.Following an additional DNA test of the sample results came back positive for the hepatitis B virus.The IBTS said the patient is being managed appropriately by a medical team. Most people with normal immune systems will clear the virus, but those infected early in life are more likely to develop chronic infection. Hepatitis B virus is transmitted through exposure to infected blood and body fluids such as semen and vaginal secretions. The most common routes of transmission relate to close contact (such as sexual, mother to child, household) with an infected individual, sharing of needles for injecting drug use, or exposure to the virus in a healthcare setting.[Byline: Jack Power, Paul Cullen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[What is likely being described here is a red blood cell transfusion obtained from an asymptomatic patient with hepatitis B during the ""window period"" when the standard screening test (hepatitis B surface antigen) has waned to undetectable levels but before anti-HBs (hepatitis B surface antibody) has developed. Blood transfused during this period can be infectious. ProMED would appreciate knowing if even in retrospect, the blood was positive for IgM anti-HBc (IgM antibody against hepatitis B core antigen) which, short of the HBV DNA assay, is the only HBV marker found during this period. There is an earlier ""window period"" which occurs before HBsAg (hepatitis B surface antigen) is detectable in the blood and while the patient is always asymptomatic but less information is available regarding infectivity at that stage.The WHO publication ""Screening Donated Blood for Transfusion Transmissible Infections"" published in 2010 (text and references available at <http://www.who.int/bloodsafety/ScreeningDonatedBloodforTransfusion.pdf>) discusses the screening of blood for transfusion for hepatitis B:""Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a member of the hepadnavirus group and is an enveloped DNA virus. HBV is transmissible by the parenteral route and may be found in blood and other body fluids. Once in the bloodstream, the virus travels to the liver where it replicates in hepatocytes.HBV is endemic globally and hyper-endemic in parts of the world. It is difficult to determine the total number of cases of transfusion-transmitted HBV globally.Transmissibility: While HBV is present in the bloodstream, the levels of the virus itself are variable. In recently infected individuals, viral DNA is normally present, although not always at high levels. Chronically infected individuals may either be infectious (viral DNA present) or non-infectious (viral DNA absent) and viremia would generally be expected to be very low or absent entirely. Screening for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) indicates infection with HBV, but does not in itself distinguish between recent and chronic infections.The distinction between acute and chronic infection is not relevant to blood screening; all HBsAg positive donations should be considered to be at high risk of transmitting HBV and should not be released for transfusion. Additionally, some studies indicate that even when HBsAg is negative, some individuals may have low levels of detectable viral DNA which will be transmitted by blood and may cause infection in the recipient.The use of unscreened HBV-infected blood and blood products will result in the transmission of HBV in the vast majority of cases. In general, the earlier in life that HBV is acquired, the more likely the individual is to develop chronic infection which then has a higher probability of progressing to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.Screening: The serology of HBV is complex. A number of different serological markers develop during the course of infection, including hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc). In addition, HBV DNA can be detected in the majority of cases, although in HBsAg negative phases of infection the DNA levels are generally relatively low and the viremia may be transient.The methods used to identify the presence of HBV employ the following screening targets:Serological markers:- Hepatitis B surface antigen- Hepatitis B core antibody, in some situationsViral nucleic acid: HBV DNA.Hepatitis B surface antigen: Hepatitis B surface antigen is the prime marker used in blood screening programs. It normally appears within three weeks after the first appearance of HBV DNA and levels rise rapidly. It can thus be detected easily by most of the highly sensitive HBsAg assays available. The presence of HBsAg may indicate current or chronic infection and thus potential infectivity. Most blood transfusion services screen donated blood for HBsAg using sensitive immunoassays. Particle agglutination assays are still available and used in some countries, although they are less sensitive than immunoassays or even simple/rapid assays.Hepatitis B core antibody: Antibody to hepatitis B core antigen is produced later in acute infection, after the appearance of HBsAg, and marks the start of the immune response to HBV infection. In general, anti-HBc persists for life, irrespective of whether the infection resolves or progresses to chronicity. In the vast majority of cases of hepatitis B, the detection of anti-HBc has limited value as HBsAg is already present. In some cases, however, during the resolution of the infection, HBsAg may decline to below detectable levels. Although anti-HBs usually then appears relatively rapidly, there may be a short period of time prior to its appearance when anti-HBc is the only detectable circulating serological marker of infection, even though the individual may still have low viremia and would thus be potentially infectious [the classical HBV ""window period."" - Mod.LL]If anti-HBc screening is introduced for routine use, it would be necessary to distinguish between individuals who are anti-HBc reactive because of previous, resolved, natural HBV infection, and are thus non-infectious, from those who have unresolved HBV infection and are thus potentially infectious. In a population with a high prevalence of infection, the number of blood donors with evidence of natural, resolved infection is likely to be significant, resulting in the potentially unnecessary discard of many blood donations. As the presence of anti-HBs is protective, anti-HBs testing of all anti-HBc reactive donations would therefore be required to distinguish between infectious and non-infectious individuals. In general, a level of anti-HBs at 100 mIU/mL is usually accepted as the minimum protective level in the context of blood screening; donations that are HBsAg negative, anti-HBc reactive with anti-HBs levels of 100 mIU/mL or more are generally considered to be safe and acceptable for release for clinical or manufacturing use.Another important consideration is that anti-HBc assays often demonstrate a high level of non-specificity. This, together with the problems associated with the confirmation of anti-HBc reactivity, often results in a situation where anti-HBc reactivity is identified in the absence of any other markers of HBV infection and where the majority of this reactivity is actually non-specific and does not reflect HBV infection. Thus, although anti-HBc screening may have advantages in some situations, the problems associated with the performance of anti-HBc assays and the complexity of dealing with HBV immune individuals may outweigh any potential benefits.Alanine aminotransferase: Testing for raised liver alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels was originally introduced in some countries prior to the identification of hepatitis C and the introduction of HCV screening in an attempt to reduce the incidence of what was then called post-transfusion non-A, non-B hepatitis (PTNANBH). ALT is an enzyme found predominantly in the liver. It circulates naturally at low levels in the bloodstream, but is released in high quantities as a result of liver damage; this is often, but not exclusively, due to viral infection.ALT is a non-specific marker of infection. With the advent of HCV screening, screening for raised ALT levels provides no identifiable benefit in terms of improving blood safety.Hepatitis B virus DNA: The detection of HBV DNA further reduces the risk of HBV transmission through the transfusion of infected blood donated during the acute window period: that is, when the results of HBsAg assays are negative, but HBV DNA is positive. Low levels of HBV DNA have also been detected in the blood of individuals after the resolution of acute HBV infection and the disappearance of HBsAg or in so-called chronic occult HBV infection.Recommendations---------------To minimize the risk of HBV infection through the route of transfusion:1. Screening should be performed using a highly sensitive and specific HBsAg immunoassay (EIA/CLIA [enzyme immunoassay/chemiluminescent immunoassays]).2. Screening using a highly sensitive and specific HBsAg rapid assay or particle agglutination assay may be performed in laboratories with small throughput, in remote areas or in emergency situations.3. Screening for anti-HBc is not recommended as a routine. Countries should determine the need for anti-HBc screening based on the prevalence and incidence of HBV infection.4. Screening for ALT is not recommended.""- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/39>.]
