The Denver Post [edited]<http://www.denverpost.com/2017/08/30/colorado-hepatitis-a-cases-spike/>The number of cases of hepatitis A in Colorado so far in 2017 is already double the yearly average, and health officials are urging more people to get vaccinated, especially if they are in a vulnerable population. So far in 2017, the state Health Department has documented 54 cases of hepatitis A. One person has died from the illness.""It's not an outbreak that we think is due to a single point source,"" such as contaminated food or water, said Dr Rachel Herlihy, the state epidemiologist. Instead, Herlihy said the disease in Colorado is being spread person-to-person, mostly among men who have sex with other men [MSM]. People who use injection drugs [, people who are homeless, people who are traveling to countries where hepatitis A is common, and people with chronic liver disease are also especially vulnerable to the disease.All of those most at risk of contracting hepatitis A should be vaccinated to prevent infection, Herlihy said. The vaccine is given in 2 doses 6 months apart. While children now routinely receive the vaccine, most adults have not, Herlihy said. Local health departments have programs to help people pay for vaccines if they cannot afford them.Hepatitis A is a virus that spreads primarily through contact with tiny amounts of infected feces. It can damage the liver and cause jaundice, fatigue, severe stomach pain, nausea, and diarrhea. There is no direct treatment for the disease, but most people who contract it will recover after several weeks. Some severe cases, though, can take months to recover from or can be fatal.[Byline: John Ingold]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The current Colorado number is twice that reported from May 2017 (Hepatitis A - USA (06): (CO) MSM 20170512.5031179)A EpiCore Global Surveillance response from 30 Jul 2017 (Hepatitis A - USA (16): (CO) 20170730.5215580) reported that:""The 1/3 of the HAV cohort who report themselves as being MSM may be an underestimate, (that is, some of the cohort may not be openly MSM).The rest of the cases have a mix of possible exposures:- About 8 of the cases (15 percent) are secondary cases (they resided in the same household as a confirmed case and had onset one incubation period later).- 2 cases traveled internationally during their exposure period, so were likely exposed in a different country.- 2 cases attend the same gym.- 1 case is homeless and spent time in southern California before being diagnosed in Colorado.- There was a cluster of 5-7 cases that might be due to IVDU (intravenous drug use) or possibly a restaurant.""It appears that in Colorado, the epidemiology is different from the larger clusters actively occurring in San Diego County, California, and eastern Michigan, which are associated with homelessness and illicit drug use. San Diego County issues weekly summaries of the growing cluster, now up to 352 with 15 deaths. Less serial data are coming from Michigan although an infectious diseases colleague of mine from the Detroit area told me that they have been seeing HAV-related hospital admissions daily. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/209>.]
