New York Times [edited]<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/28/health/fda-stem-cell.html?_r=1>The FDA [US Food and Drug Administration] announced a crackdown on dangerous stem cell clinics on [Mon 28 Aug 2017], while at the same time pledging to ease the path to approval for companies and doctors with legitimate treatments in the growing field. The agency reported actions against 2 large stem cell clinics and a biotech company, saying that it was critical to shut down ""unscrupulous actors"" in regenerative medicine, a broad umbrella that includes stem cell and gene therapies and immunotherapies. ""The FDA will not allow deceitful actors to take advantage of vulnerable patients by purporting to have treatments or cures for serious diseases without any proof that they actually work,"" said Dr Scott Gottlieb, the FDA commissioner.Stem cells, which can be extracted from bone marrow, blood, or fat, can develop into many different types of cells, and are thought to have the potential to repair or replace tissue damaged by disease, injury, or aging. But so far, the FDA has approved only a few stem-cell products.The companies that the FDA cited have been performing liposuction to remove belly fat from patients, extracting stem cells and then injecting those cells back into the patients to treat various ailments.On [Fri 25 Aug 2017], the agency said, federal marshals seized 500 doses of live vaccinia virus vaccine for smallpox belonging to StemImmune Inc., a San Diego firm that develops stem cell-based immunotherapies for cancer. The raid came after the FDA learned that the vaccine was being used to create an unapproved stem cell product, a combination of excess amounts of vaccine and stem cells derived from body fat, which was then administered to cancer patients with potentially compromised immune systems. The FDA said patients at the California Stem Cell Treatment Centers in Rancho Mirage and Beverly Hills, California, received the treatment made with the smallpox vaccine. It also said it had serious concerns about how StemImmune obtained the vaccine for use in an unapproved and potentially dangerous treatment.StemImmune obtained at least some of the vaccine from the CDC, according to Thomas Skinner, a CDC spokesman. In its request, the company said it was conducting cancer research involving the vaccinia virus, and needed to vaccinate researchers -- a seemingly legitimate reason. The company did not tell the CDC that it was going to inject the vaccine into patients, he said. A statement from StemImmune said the company had lawfully obtained the drug.The FDA also issued a warning letter to US Stem Cell, a private clinic in Sunrise, Florida. The company was the subject of a March [2017] report in The New England Journal of Medicine, describing how one woman went blind and 2 others suffered severe, permanent eye damage after being given shots of stem cells, extracted from fat, into their eyes. The warning letter accused the company of impairing the FDA's ability to conduct its inspection by refusing to allow inspectors in, and denying them access to employees. It also said that US Stem Cell had failed to establish proper quality control and sanitary standards.[The entire article related to FDA issues with stem cell clinics can be found at the source URL above. - Mod.LL][Byline: Sheila Kaplan, Denise Grady]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Clearly scientifically inappropriate use of stem cells by ""unscrupulous"" clinics is occurring as discussed in the article above. The posting of this on ProMED was precipitated by the report of the smallpox vaccine, referred to as vaccinia, administered with stem cells by injecting directly into a tumor. The current vaccine ""ACAM2000"" is the same virus as the former ""Dryvax"" except that the virus is grown in tissue culture rather than from inoculation of calves. The only approved indication for the vaccine is to protect individuals who are working with variations of the vaccinia vaccine in laboratories and for military personnel or others who theoretically could be exposed to smallpox as a biowarfare event.I recently immunized several dozen laboratory workers with ACAM2000 related to work they will be doing with a recombinant vaccinia virus in an animal model. In order to obtain the vaccine, we had to fill out a request form with a list of individuals to be immunized. As a reminder, the technique for immunization is ""scarification"" where a small amount of the reconstituted virus is introduced into the skin using a bifurcated needle (<https://jetinfectors.files.wordpress.com/2017/01/bifurcated-needle-1.jpg?w=401&h=261>). The primary ""take"" is a vesicle/pustule developing about 7 days later (shown at <http://health.mo.gov/emergencies/ert/pdf/SmallpoxVaccinationReactions.pdf>). One contraindication for use is in immunocompromised hosts (including some patients with cancer) and the virus is never inoculated by other techniques. More information about vaccination can be obtained from the CDC at <https://www.cdc.gov/smallpox/vaccine-basics/index.html>.Currently in press in Lancet Infectious Diseases, Clarissa Damaso from Instituto de BiofÌ sica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil has written an excellent review on the history of smallpox vaccines:Damaso CR: Revisiting Jenner's mysteries, the role of the Beaugency lymph in the evolutionary path of ancient smallpox vaccines. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017. pii: S1473-3099(17)30445-0. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(17)30445-0; full text, references, and figures available at <http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/laninf/PIIS1473-3099(17)30445-0.pdf>:""The origins of Jenner's vaccine have been intensively debated over the years. British researcher Downie studied the close immunological relationship of variola, cowpox, and vaccinia viruses, which led him to propose in 1951 that vaccinia virus had emerged from cowpox virus in the early years of vaccination (26). In 1965, Downie strongly opposed Peter Razzell's proposal that vaccinia virus had derived from an attenuated form of variola virus (27-29). Derrick Baxby (1940-2017) also refuted Razzell's belief and proposed in 1981 that modern 20th century vaccines had derived from horsepox virus (30-32). In fact, we currently know that vaccinia virus is more closely related to horsepox virus than to cowpox virus. On the basis of full-genome analysis and recent phylogenetic inferences, horsepox virus is considered an ancestor of the vaccinia lineage (33-36). Because all modern smallpox vaccine strains consist of vaccinia virus, one would expect that horsepox virus, or even vaccinia virus, would be better candidates than cowpox virus for the original source of Jenner's vaccine. Although an attractive hypothesis, the obscure history of cowpox, horsepox, and vaccinia viruses further adds to the mystery. Since the mid-20th century, cows have been rarely found sick because of infection by cowpox virus, and only felines, pet rodents, and zoo animals, primarily in Europe, have been affected by the virus in the past decades (37-40). As for horsepox, the disease is rare and some believe it is extinct, at least in Europe (23,24,31,32,41). Only one existing strain of horsepox virus obtained from Mongolian horses in 1976 is currently known (33). However, vaccinia virus has never been found naturally occurring in animals, except in India, where the strain buffalopox infects buffaloes, and in Brazil, where the strain Cantagalo (Cantagalo virus) infects dairy cows (2,42-44). In any case, all 3 orthopoxviruses cause zoonotic infections, and individuals acquire the infection when handling infected animals [figures 2 and 3] (2,22,37,40,45,46)""""The history and evolutionary relationships of the different smallpox vaccine strains remain obscure, because most strains and clonal variants have not yet been completely sequenced. Historical and scientific evidence suggests that the Beaugency lymph [lymph passed in cows by Chambon and Lanoix and, in October, 1866, they mixed this material with lymph obtained from a 2nd natural case of cowpox discovered in Saint-MandÌ©, in the suburbs of Paris. The mixture was referred to as the Beaugency lymph and was used subsequently by the Animal Vaccine Institute as a seed to produce the vaccine (20,48,72,74)] and horsepox virus made a strong contribution to the genetic makeup of the existing vaccine strains, particularly those from continental Europe, USA, and Brazil. Evidence also suggests that the Beaugency lymph was probably a vaccinia virus strain or a close ancestor related to horsepox virus, and not a cowpox strain. Thus, it is reasonable to believe not only that cowpox virus was not used as a smallpox vaccine in the 19th century, but that it might have never been used at all. Assumptions about the origins of the Beaugency lymph also indicate that vaccinia virus was once a circulating virus in animals in Europe in the 19th century, but later it disappeared and now has no natural hosts, except in Brazil, India, and perhaps in Egypt, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Nepal. Many questions still persist, and analysis of full-genome sequences of ancient vaccine strains would help unravel this fascinating medical mystery."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
