PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0005837>ref: Samuel M, Maoz D, Manrique P, et al. Community effectiveness of indoor spraying as a dengue vector control method: A systematic review. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017; 11(8): e0005837----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------BackgroundThe prevention and control of dengue rely mainly on vector control methods, including indoor residual spraying (IRS) and indoor space spraying (ISS). This study aimed to systematically review the available evidence on community effectiveness of indoor spraying.MethodsA systematic review was conducted using 7 databases (PubMed, EMBASE, LILACS, Web of Science, WHOLIS, Cochrane, and Google Scholar) and a manual search of the reference lists of the identified studies. Data from included studies were extracted, analysed and reported.ResultsThe review generated 7 studies only, 3 IRS and 4 ISS (2/3 controlled studies respectively). Two IRS studies measuring human transmission showed a decline. One IRS and all 4 ISS studies measuring adult mosquitoes showed a very good effect, up to 100 percent, but not sustained. Two IRS studies and one ISS measuring immature mosquitoes, showed mixed results.ConclusionsIt is evident that IRS and also ISS are effective adulticidal interventions against _Aedes_ mosquitoes. However, evidence to suggest effectiveness of IRS as a larvicidal intervention and to reduce human dengue cases is limited-and even more so for ISS. Overall, there is a paucity of studies available on these 2 interventions that may be promising for dengue vector control, particularly for IRS with its residual effect.Author summaryThe effectiveness of indoor residual spraying (IRS) and indoor space spraying (ISS) as dengue vector control methods depend on many factors. This study aims to systematically review the evidence on the community effectiveness of indoor spraying of insecticides to reduce _Aedes_ mosquito populations and thereby to control dengue transmission. A systematic literature review was performed in PubMed, EMBASE, LILACS, Web of Science, WHO library database (WHOLIS), Cochrane, and Google Scholar, including a manual search of the reference lists of the identified studies since its inceptions until 15.02.2017. A total of 39 articles were retrieved for full assessment. Seven studies were included and analysed after final application of inclusion and exclusion criteria: 2 IRS studies with control, one without, 3 ISS studies and one, respectively. One IRS study and 4 ISS studies showed good evidence of effectiveness on adult _Aedes_ mosquitoes. Evidence of effectiveness of IRS as a larvicidal intervention exists but is still inadequate, and is weak for ISS. Evidence of effectiveness of IRS on human dengue cases as a single intervention exists, but was limited and not available for ISS. It is recommended to scale up the research regarding the community effectiveness of IRS and ISS, including measuring dengue transmission, particularly, for IRS with its residual effect. It is also suggested to study in depth the factors that could affect the community effectiveness of IRS and ISS on _Aedes_ populations and on human dengue cases. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Fogging and spraying houses and other buildings to control _Aedes aegypti_ during outbreaks of dengue fever, chikungunya fever and Zika virus infections are implemented by local health authorities often in the face of public demands for the government to ""do something"". Although fogging may reduce adult mosquitoes, if breeding sites remain, there is concern that transmission will resume when a new generation of adults emerges. That is why larvices are often applied to breeding sites. There are also environmmental concerns when insecticides are applied inappropriately. The above review indicates that the effectiveness of indoor residual spraying and indoor space spraying requires additional study to determine its effectiveness for reduction of transmission of these viruses. Bed nets and curtains impregnated with long-duration insecticides have been shown to reduce dengue virus transmission but have not been widely adopted. Questions about the effacacy of spraying as an approach to reducing vector populations and virus transmission has  led to the development of systems employing genetically modified _Aedes aegypti_ for population reduction or the use of _Wolbachia_ bacteria to infect _Aedes aegypti_ and block virus transmission. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
