Daily Telegraph [edited]<https://tinyurl.com/y85nbywv>A hepatitis A outbreak has hit Sydney with 12 cases confirmed in the past 5 weeks. NSW [New South Wales] Health has launched an investigation, saying 10 of the people contracted the disease in Australia. The average is 2 cases of locally acquired hepatitis A each year.Dr Vicky Sheppeard, Director Communicable Diseases with NSW Health said: ""NSW Health is working with the NSW Food Authority to investigate the outbreak, including assessment of patterns of food distribution and any links to overseas outbreaks. However, no specific food has yet been connected to the outbreak. ""Hepatitis A is usually contracted overseas in high-risk countries, but 10 of these 12 people notified to NSW Health since 26 Jul 2017 have had no recent overseas travel.""Hepatitis A is caused by a virus that spreads in contaminated food or through poor hygiene. Symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, fever, and yellowing of the skin, dark urine, and pale stools. ""If people think they might have those symptoms they should go to the GP and they should be very careful with hand washing and not prepare food for other people,"" Dr Sheppeard said.Dr Sheppeard also said more people are expected to fall ill in the outbreak with 3 people so sick they've had to be hospitalised.Authorities have been questioning the sick people in NSW and believe the common link may be a food distributor through supermarkets or cafes after they were unable to find a restaurant they'd all dined at.""It's a matter of trying to understand where these people have eaten and if there is a common source that exposed all of them,"" she said. ""It is tricky with hepatitis A because the incubation period is over 6 weeks so it's a really long period where people have to remember where they may have eaten out or purchased food from.""The sick people have been asked to recall what they ate and where it was purchased from for up to 50 days before they had symptoms. The 10 locally infected cases are spread across the state with one person in Newcastle, another in Illawarra, and the others are mainly in south eastern Sydney, Sydney, and Northern Sydney. All 10 cases have been diagnosed since 26 Jun 2017 with the most recent detected on Fri 1 Sep 2017.Samples from the sick people have been sent for genetic sequencing and comparison to an international database of hepatitis A cases. The results showed the NSW cases are similar to a ongoing outbreak in Europe that is suspected to be linked to lettuce [see comment below - Mod.LL]. There have been more than 1500 cases of hepatitis A across Europe since June 2016. ""It's unlikely that lettuce from Europe would come here but there are a few things we've got to investigate,"" Dr Sheppeard said.Food can be contaminated with hepatitis A if human faeces are in the soil it's grown in or the water used to wash it. The disease can also be spread by the food handlers if they are carrying the illness.[Byline: Rose Brennan]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED would like more information regarding the epidemiology of the cases. Although the posting implicates lettuce as the vehicle of HAV transmission in Europe but I am not at all aware that this is the case. In a July 2017 ProMED post (Hepatitis A - EU (03): MSM, ECDC report 20170705.5147994), men who have sex with men (MSM) seems to be the major risk factor:  ""New cases of hepatitis A cases have soared in Western Europe over the past 6 months as a result of an epidemic in gay and bisexual men, the European Centre for Disease Control reported last week [week of 25 Jun-1 Jul 2017]. ECDC says that almost 1500 cases of hepatitis A have been identified as linked, in 3 outbreaks, predominantly in men who have sex with men. A further 2660 cases are still being investigated and 10 countries have reported an increase in cases compared with 2016. Public authorities in France, Portugal, and the United Kingdom have already issued warnings about the hepatitis A outbreak to gay men, recommending that gay men get vaccinated."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/296>.]
