Korea JoongAng Daily [edited]<https://tinyurl.com/ya9hnp4n>Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is conducting an epidemiological investigation into a case of 7 children and 1 adult who showed symptoms of food poisoning with vomiting and diarrhea after eating McDonald's hamburgers on 25 Aug 2017 at a Jeonju branch in North Jeolla.Authorities are not ruling out the possibility that the 8 individuals contracted hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), widely known as ""hamburger disease,"" a bacterial infection that can leave the renal system severely damaged. Many cases are caused by _E. coli_, which can be found in undercooked meat like hamburgers. Children under the age of 5 are particularly vulnerable. On 25 Aug 2017, a group of 15 adults and elementary school students from the same church in Jeonju visited McDonald's Jeonju branch and ate bulgogi burgers together. A day later, 7 children and 1 adult experienced diarrhea and vomiting. The authorities declared an epidemiological probe into the case on Sat 2 Sep 2017.As the case was publicized, McDonald's Korea halted selling bulgogi burgers nationwide starting on Sat 2 Sep 2017. On its website, a notice says, ""We have decided to stop selling bulgogi burgers pending the outcome of the ongoing investigation by authorities,"" adding that the multinational company's Korean branch was taking the issue seriously. It also said the company will do its best to help patients recover, though without elaborating on how or when.The outcome of the ongoing probe is expected to be made public around Wed 6 Sep 2017.The case in Jeonju is not the only incident that the corporation, which has 440 branches in Korea alone, has recently found itself in. In July 2017, the mother of a 5-year-old girl filed a complaint claiming irreparable harm was done to her child because of the fast food chain's mismanagement of its food products. The mother, claimed her daughter contracted HUS after eating a Happy Meal in September 2016, [and she] now must undergo peritoneal dialysis on a daily basis.McDonald's Korea branch also received a complaint from the parents of a 2-year-old girl, who began to have diarrhea and bloody excrement after eating a hamburger patty on 17 May 2017 at a Jamsil branch in southern Seoul. On 19 May 2017, the child was admitted to a local emergency room. The child's condition improved and she was discharged later that day.[Byline: Kang Jin-kyu]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Whether this cluster of illnesses is caused by enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ is unknown as yet and ProMED would appreciate more information about the illnesses. A one day incubation period is short for EHEC but the outbreak is occurring in the wake of several cases of EHEC linked to the chain in South Korea.Classic bulgogi recipes use a marinade of soy, ginger, garlic, and gochujang (Korean chili paste) to flavor and tenderize strips of meat. Because combining a marinade into ground beef would change the consistency of the hamburger, making it more of a ""sloppy-joe"", usually a bulgogi inspired sauce is used on top of the burger although a Korean inspired spice combination can be added to the ground beef.North Jeolla province or Jeollabuk-do is a province in the southwest of South Korea and can be found on a map at <http://tinyurl.com/jvukf5u>. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/21702>. - Mod.LL]
