A reliable source [edited]Regarding the strain of _Brucella_ involved in a case of unpasteurized milk-related human brucellosis, it is reported to be vaccine strain RB-51. Apparently, the animal was older than thought and cycling, thus the vaccine hit the milk. It has happened a time or 2. Their investigation has yielded no other strains or infected animals.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED would like official confirmation of the identification of the organism and if there were additional cases.Regarding human exposures to the _Brucella abortus_ RB51 vaccine, this 2004 report outlined 26 exposures, none related to milkAshford DA, di Pietra J, Lingappa J, et al: Adverse events in humans associated with accidental exposure to the livestock brucellosis vaccine RB51. Vaccine. 2004;22: 3435-3439.Abstract--------""_Brucella abortus_ strain RB51 vaccine, is an attenuated live bacterial vaccine that was licensed conditionally by the Center for Veterinary Biologics, Veterinary Services, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA, on 23 Feb 1996, for vaccination of cattle in the USA. Accidental human inoculations can occur during vaccination of cattle, and previous live brucella vaccines designed for cattle have been known to cause brucellosis in humans. The CDC established passive surveillance for accidental inoculation with the RB51 vaccine in the USA to determine if this veterinary vaccine is associated with human disease, to describe the circumstances of accidental inoculation, to evaluate the potential efficacy of post-exposure chemoprophylaxis, and to develop recommendations for post-exposure management following exposure to RB51. Reports were received from 26 individuals. Accidental exposure to RB51 occurred by needle stick injury in 21 people (81 percent), conjunctival spray exposure in 4 (15 percent), and spray exposure of an open wound in one (4 percent) individual. At least one systemic symptom was reported in 19 (73 percent) people, including 3 (12 percent) who reported persistent local reactions with systemic involvement. One case required surgery, and _B. abortus_ strain RB51 was isolated from the wound of that individual. A total of 7 cases reported no adverse event associated with accidental exposure. Nine cases reported previous exposure to brucella vaccines, including one case who also reported a previous diagnosis of brucellosis following exposure to S19 vaccine. Accidental needle stick injuries and conjunctival or open wound exposures of humans with the RB51 vaccine are associated with both local and systemic adverse events in the USA that are consistent with brucellosis; however, it remains undetermined if strain RB51 vaccine can cause systemic brucellosis in humans. Early culture attempts on those exposed and developing disease in the future and serologic diagnostic assays for anti-RB-51 antibodies are needed to define if these adverse events are due to RB51 and to define appropriate prophylaxis regimens""Regarding brucella vaccine strains in milk, this appears to be uncommon and it is not clear if human transmission of the vaccine strain has occurred from unpasteurized milk:1. Miranda KL, Poester FP, Dorneles EM, et al: _Brucella abortus_ RB51 in milk of vaccinated adult cattle. Acta Trop. 2016 Aug;160: 58-61.Abstract--------The aim of this study was to evaluate the shedding of _Brucella abortus_ in the milk of cows vaccinated with a full dose of RB51 during lactation. A total of 18 cows, 9 previously vaccinated with S19 as calves and 9 non-vaccinated, were immunized subcutaneously with 1.3ÌÄ--10(10)CFU of _B. abortus_ RB51, 30-60 days after parturition. Milk samples from all animals were collected daily until day 7, and at weekly interval for the next 9 weeks after vaccination. To evaluate the shedding of _B. abortus_, milk samples were submitted for culture and PCR. No _B. abortus_ was isolated from any sample tested. Only one sample, collected on 1st day after vaccination from a cow previously vaccinated, was faintly positive in the PCR. In conclusion, the public health hazard associated with milk consumption from cows vaccinated with RB51 in post-partum is very low, despite vaccination with the full dose and regardless of previous S19 vaccination.2. Pacheco WA, Genovez ME, Pozzi CR, et al: Excretion of _Brucella abortus_ vaccine B19 strain during a reproductive cycle in dairy cows. Braz J Microbiol. 2012;: 594-601Abstract---------This paper aimed to determine the excretion period of B19 vaccine strain during a complete reproductive cycle (from estrus synchronization, artificial insemination, pregnancy and until 30 days after parturition) of dairy cows from 3 to 9-years-old that were previously vaccinated from 3 to 8 months. Three groups were monitored with monthly milk and urine collection during 12 months: G1 with 7 cows from 3 to 4-years-old; G2 with 3 cows from 5 to 6-years-old; and G3 with 4 cows from 7 to 9-years-old. Urine and milk samples were submitted to bacteriological culture and urine and PCR reactions for detection of _Brucella spp._ and PCR-multiplex for B19 strain identification. Ring test (RT) was also performed in the milk samples, and serum samples were tested by buffered acidified plate antigen test (BAPA). All animals were serologically negative at BAPA and _Brucella spp._ was not isolated from both urine and milk samples. RT revealed 13/210 (6.2 percent) positive milk samples. PCR reactions detected DNA of _Brucella spp._ in 86/420 (20.5 percent) samples. In urine it was found a significantly higher frequency (35.2 percent; 74/210) than in milk (5.7 percent; 12/210), more frequently from the estrus to 150 days of pregnancy and after parturition (6.7 percent; 10/150), and from 150 days of pregnancy to parturition (3.4 percent; 2/60), and they were all identified as B19 strain. In 3 groups, intermittent excretion of B19 strain was detected mainly in urine samples, which confirmed its multiplication and persistence in cows for until 9 years. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/245>.]
