Jerusalem Post [edited]<http://tinyurl.com/ycw7kacz>A man's life was saved at Haifa's Rambam Medical Center after tick bites from a neighbor's dog he was caring for infected him with rickettsial bacteria, which almost killed him. The man, in his 60s and living in the North, was hospitalized in critical condition after contracting the bacterial disease. He had experienced fever and headaches a few days earlier, with a red rash appearing soon after his hospitalization. His condition quickly worsened, and he was moved to intensive care, where he spent long days swinging between life and near-death. Some ticks can cause Rocky Mountain spotted fever, typhus fever, North Asian tick-borne rickettsiosis, and African tick-bite fever. 18 years ago, _Rickettsia_ killed singer Meir Ariel.According to his symptoms, the team suspected that the cause of the deterioration in the condition of the man was a rickettsia. Other symptoms from the infection can include dizziness, vomiting, weakness, apathy, shortness of breath, and low blood pressure. The suspected diagnosis was bolstered when the patient told the doctors that he had taken care of a friend's dog. As testing for the bacterium takes time and the man's condition was worsening, it was decided to start antimicrobial treatment before the diagnosis was confirmed. After 2 weeks of treatment and supervision in Rambam's intensive care unit, he was moved to a regular ward.Ticks are found mainly in the fields, in areas with tall grass and other vegetation. They are more prevalent during the summer, but in Israel, they are active all year round. The ticks leap from the plants to dogs and people walking in fields. The disease is more common among dog owners because they walk with their dogs in areas where the ticks are present or because ticks on the dog inevitably are passed on. Without appropriate intervention, the disease can cause the failure of many bodily systems, including kidneys, lungs and liver -- and may even be fatal.""Pay attention to unusual symptoms after trips or contact with dogs that may carry the tick,"" explained Dr Yaron Bar-Lavie, head of the respiratory intensive care unit at Rambam who directed the man's treatment. ""Without proper treatment, the situation could deteriorate rapidly, as happened in this case, and end in disaster. We warn that in case of fear of infection, we must evacuate quickly to the hospital,"" he said.""It is recommended to put dogs walking in the fields of collar against ticks, and to check the dog after a trip to the presence of ticks and remove them. Ticks usually attach themselves to people on the skin and may reach the groin area, the hairline or even on hands and feet where they cling and suck blood. The tick excretes the anesthetizing material so that the whole process of the feeding is not felt, but they can be identified by a black or grayish color after it is filled with blood,"" Bar-Lavie added.[Byline: Judy Siegel-Itzkovich]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Although not specifically stated, the illness here is probably Israeli spotted fever (ISF) caused by _Rickettsia conorii_ subsp. _israelensis_, which belongs to the _R. conorii_ complex. It was first reported in 1974 in Israel. _R. conorii_ subsp. _conorii_ causes Mediterranean spotted fever (MSF). Every year, about 300 cases of MSF are notified (mainly from June through September) in the Italian island of Sicily. MSF is typically characterized by fever, skin rash, and a black eschar at the site of the tick bite (""tache noire"").A recently published article on ISF (Colomba C, Trizzino M, Giammanco A, et al: Israeli spotted fever in Sicily. Description of two cases and minireview. Int J Infect Dis. 2017; 61: 7-12, <http://www.ijidonline.com/article/S1201-9712(17)30114-5/fulltext>) is an excellent source for information on the infection.Abstract--------""Mediterranean spotted fever (MSF) is endemic in Italy, where _Rickettsia conorii_ subsp. _conorii_ was thought to be the only pathogenic rickettsia and _Rhipicephalus sanguineus_ the vector and main reservoir. _R. conorii_ subsp. _israelensis_, which belongs to the _R. conorii_ complex, is the agent of Israeli spotted fever (ISF); apart from Israel, it has also been found in Italy (Sicily and Sardinia) and in different regions of Portugal. We describe here 2 severe cases of ISF which occurred in otherwise healthy Italian adults. Their characteristics are analyzed and discussed in the light of other 91 cases found through a systematic review of international literature.""A discussion of the clinical features of the illness from the paper is highlighted below (the references can be accessed at the original URL):""All but 2 cases were contracted in 3 countries: Israel, Portugal, and Italy. One case was reported in a patient returning from a trip to Libya and one case in Tunisia (Znazen et al, 2011, Boillat et al, 2008). Mean age was 56.2 (min. max 12-76; sd 15.29). Medical history was unremarkable in all reviewed cases reported except in the 1st of our 2 cases that had a history of chronic alcohol abuse.The illness had a sudden onset with fever (81 percent), rash (77 percent), headache (44 percent); tache noire [an eschar found at the site of the tick bite. - Mod.LL] was present in 27 percent of the cases, and gastrointestinal symptoms were present in 50 percent of the cases. 27.3 percent of patients died of multiorgan failure, acute renal and hepatic failure, purpura fulminans, and acute encephalitis.In all cases, molecular biology techniques allowed the detection of copies of rickettsial DNA with amplification of specific sequences of the genes encoding 16S rRNA, the 17-kDa protein, citrate synthase (gltA), and the outer membrane proteins OmpA and OmpB (Znazen et al, 2013) on blood (13 cases), eschar (3 cases) and autopsy samples (2 cases). Serology, performed with immunofluorescence assay (IFA) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), was positive in only 11 percent of cases.In all cases, therapeutic regimens included intravenous or oral doxycycline.The 2 cases of severe ISF we described had a favorable course. Case 1 experienced severe sepsis reaching new criteria for diagnosis of sepsis (Giamarellos-Bourboulis et al, 2016); he had a proven risk factor for developing a severe form of the disease; analysis of the relationship between comorbidities and a fatal MSF outcome demonstrated that alcoholism is a statistically significant host condition which is a risk factor for a fatal outcome and for severity of disease (De Sousa et al, 2008). Case 2 had encephalitic symptoms but did not have risk factors like the other cases examined. Nevertheless, most examined cases of ISF presented severe forms of the disease and a high fatality rate was found.De Sousa et al carried out a prospective study on 69 Portuguese patients with ISF and compared the clinical picture and severity of _R. conorii_ subsp. _israelensis_ and _R. conorii_ subsp. _conorii_ infection. They showed a statistically significantly greater severity of ISF compared to MSF infection caused by _R. conorii_ subsp. _conorii_; case fatality rate for _R. conorii_ subsp. _israelensis_ was significantly greater than for _R. conorii_ subsp. _conorii_ infection (29 percent vs. 13 percent), and a greater percentage of patients with ISF strain infection required admission to ICU, compared to those with _R. conorii_ subsp. _conorii_ infection (36 percent vs 22 percent) (De Sousa et al, 2008). All cases reported in Israel have been fatal, as well as the 2 cases which occurred in the UK -- a tourist traveling in Portugal and another subject probably infected in Libya (Weinberger et al, 2008, Znazen et al, 2011, Boillat et al, 2008). Among the cases of ISF described in Portugal, apart from the cases described by De Sousa, 2 of those reported by Bacellar died of shock and multiorgan failure (Bacellar et al, 1999). Of the 7 cases described in Italy, outcome was favorable in the 2 cases we have reported and in 2 out of 5 reported by Giammanco; the other 3 patients developed disseminated intravascular coagulation and progression toward coma and one of these patients died the day after admission (Giammanco et al, 2005a).Therefore, _R. conorii_ subsp. _israelensis_ would appear to be more virulent than _R. conorii_ subsp. _conorii_ even if the microbial pathogenic mechanism by which it causes more severe illness remains to be determined. Gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea have been prominent manifestations reported in patients with fatal course of ISF and, overall, more frequent in patients with ISF compared with _R. conorii_ subsp. _conorii_-infected patients (De Sousa et al, 2008).Tache noire, the black eschar at the site of the tick bite, in our experience is present in more than 60 percent of cases of MSF (Cascio et al, 2001, Colomba et al, 2006, Cascio et al, 1998, Cascio et al, 2002); however, it is markedly less noted in ISF, where it was present in only 27 percent of patients. The absence of eschar may be an obstacle to correct diagnosis especially in cases of travelers coming from non-endemic areas (Znazen et al, 2011, Boillat et al, 2008). Therefore, rickettsiosis should always be suspected in febrile travelers, especially when they present with a rash, even in the absence of history of tick exposure and inoculation eschar; patients should start appropriate therapy without delay if suspicion of rickettsiosis arises in order to prevent a poor outcome due to aggressive rickettsial strains. Indeed, the supposed ability of the ISF rickettsia to cause life-threatening disease has been also ascribed to late diagnosis due to its uncharacteristic presentation (Yagupsky and Wolach, 1993).Tetracyclines are considered standard treatment for MSF even though they can cause significant adverse effects like staining of the teeth and bone toxicity, especially in children. For this reason the macrolides have emerged as a potential alternative therapy in children (Cascio et al, 2001, Cascio et al, 2002, Cascio and Colomba, 2002). In all reviewed cases, but one, doxycycline was promptly started; delayed medical consultation and late initiation of antimicrobial therapy (6 days after symptoms onset) may have contributed to the fatal course in the UK tourist traveling in Portugal (Chai et al, 2008). Haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is a rare but potentially fatal disease that can be associated with rickettsial infection and other zoonotic diseases (Cascio et al, 2012, Cascio et al, 2011).""- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/35084>.]
