Local 8 Now [edited]<http://www.local8now.com/content/news/Cases-of-West-Nile-Virus-La-Crosse-Encephalitis-increasing-in-Tennessee-442923103.html>The Tennessee Department of Health (TDH) has now confirmed 11 cases of La Crosse Virus infection in the state so far in 2017. Mosquito-borne illness is more common during late summer and TDH recommends taking simple steps to avoid mosquito bites and help prevent mosquito-borne illnesses.''We typically see an increase in mosquito-borne illnesses caused by La Crosse Virus in our state this time of year,'' said TDH Commissioner John Dreyzehner, MD, MPH. ''There are no vaccines for this illness, so it's important to use insect repellent on skin and wear 'long, loose and light' clothing to make it harder for mosquitoes to bite and easier to spot them. Buying or properly treating clothes with permethrin, which is like body armor against mosquito bites, is also a good idea for higher-risk situations.''TDH urged Tennesseans to increase their efforts to avoid mosquitoes. It's also important to limit mosquito breeding sites. Individuals can eliminate potential breeding sites if they tip and toss standing water, and drain and cover objects near homes or businesses that may contain or collect water. A mosquito can lay eggs in a container as small as a soda bottle cap.Additionally, keeping window screens on your home or business in good condition will prevent mosquitoes from entering buildings.""Many mosquito species do not travel farther than the length of football field or 2 from where they are hatched,'' said TDH Vector-Borne Disease Program Director Abelardo Moncayo, PhD. ''By establishing a zone where mosquitoes cannot breed around your home, you protect yourself, your family and your neighbors.''Follow these additional tips to avoid mosquito bites:- Use EPA-approved insect repellants containing DEET, Picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus or IR3535 on your skin. Follow all label recommendations for use. Pay particular attention to recommendations for use on children and never apply any of these products around the mouth or eyes at any age. Talk with a health care provider if questions arise.- Use products containing permethrin, a highly effective insecticide, for clothing, shoes, bed nets and camping gear. Permethrin-treated clothing repels and kills ticks, mosquitoes and other pests and retains this effect after repeated laundering. Some commercial products are available pretreated with permethrin. As a caution, however, do not use permethrin directly on skin.- Wear ''long, loose and light'' clothing. It's best to wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants. Tuck pants into socks and shirts into pants. Loose-fitting clothing helps prevent bites through the fabric. Light-colored clothes are less attractive to many insects and help make them easier to spot and remove.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The 11cases of La Crosse encephalitis in Tennessee is not surprising. Eastern Tennessee is one of the focal La Crosse virus (LACV) endemic areas. Generally, the state reports about 12 cases each year. La Crosse encephalitis is the state's most common cause of mosquito-borne illness. Clinical encephalitis caused by La Crosse virus is most common in pre-school aged children, and cases in adults are somewhat unusual. It is seldom fatal, but significant hospital stays may occur, and there may be neurological sequelae. Cases may occur earlier in the summer season than other arthropod-borne viruses because the virus can be transovarially transmitted by the infected female to her eggs, so that emerging adults may already be infected and ready to transmit the virus without the need to take an infectious blood meal from an infected forest mammal. Eliminating fresh water catchments that are breeding sites of _Ochlerotatus (Aedes) triseriatus_, the La Crosse virus vector mosquito, is wise. Discarded vehicle tires should be added to the list. The Asian tiger mosquito _Aedes albopictus_ can also transmit the virus.The CDC has a good summary of LACV, its epidemiology, geographic distribution, and clinical characteristics at <https://www.cdc.gov/lac/tech/epi.html>.An image of _Ochlerotatus (Aedes) triseriatus_ can be seen at <http://phil.cdc.gov/phil/details.asp?pid=2166>.Tennessee can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/62013>. - Mod.TY]
