L'Express Madagascar [in French, machine trans., edited]<http://www.lexpressmada.com/blog/actualites/epidemie-la-peste-refait-surface/>Around 5 pm yesterday [Mon 11 Sep 2017], a 40 year old woman suspected to have died from pneumonic plague, according to a source within the (BMH), was buried at the cemetery of Anjanahary. She died at the Respiratory Diseases Service of the hospital in Antananarivo-city, after being admitted on [ Sun 10 Sep 2017], according to concordant sources.The victim had contracted the disease during a holiday in the east of the Big Island. ""She was staying with her family in Toamasina, when 4 of the family, including the husband and wife, died suddenly. It was suspected plague,"" reported a relative.The eastern part of the island is, however, not a plague area. It is feared that those deaths are connected to that of a person who came from Moramanga and was traveling in Toamasina. Sources reveal that the latter would have joined Toamasina by bush taxi, starting from Moramanga, following a suspected pneumonic plague outbreak. It is believed that a young man sitting next to him in the public transport was then infected, and also died.Asked about these facts, the responsible service of the fight against the plague in the Ministry of Public Health at the hospital, preferred to remain silent. The same happened with the director of health surveillance and epidemiological surveillance of the Ministry, who is currently on a mission to Toamasina Another source in the ministry who would urge everyone to take precautions against these suspected cases of plague, revealed the existence of 5 suspicious deaths and 10 patients since the beginning of the plague season. They were listed in Toamasina, Moramanga and Miarinarivo excluding that recorded in Antananarivo. She also stressed that members of the family of the deceased in Toamasina would have already returned home to Mahajanga and Voh̩mar.However, there is no risk of transmission of the disease to those who have been in contact with the victim. The team of the Ministry of Public Health and of the BMH had been rushed to the hospital to distribute plague prevention drugs to his family and relatives and the hospital staff. They have also conducted a service disinfection operation where the deceased was admitted and the mortuary. Despite this, consulting a doctor is highly recommended in case of suspicious symptoms, namely high fever, painful glands, cough with bloody sputum. Bush fires are to be avoided and the sanitation of the neighborhoods is indicated, to prevent the rats from entering in the village.[Byline: Miangaly Ralitera]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The exact circumstances regarding the etiology of these deaths and the epidemiology of transmission are not entirely clear. ProMED would like more information about this reported outbreak of pneumonic plague, the only form of human _Yersinia pestis_ infection that transmits from person-to-person. The ProMED report from January 2017 (Plague - Madagascar: fatalities 20170110.4754927) also reported cases of plague in the east of the island, also in an non-endemic area for plague. The following paragraph of this posting is from Chanteau S, Ratsifasoamanana L, Rasoamanana B, et al: Plague, a Reemerging Disease in Madagascar. Emerg Infect Dis 1998;4: 101-4. Available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2627662/pdf/9452403.pdf>:Between 1930 and 1990, bubonic plague had ""virtually disappeared"" on the island due to efficient pest-control and good health-management. However since 1990, an annual 200 cases are being reported and bubonic plague takes on epidemic form especially in the port of Mahajanga each year. In the capital city of Antananarivo more cases are also being notified each year since 1990. Madagascar (pop. 13 million) [pop. 22.92 million, 2013] has accounted for 45 percent of all the cases of plague in Africa.Fatalities related to plague usually are caused by spread of the organism from the bubo (the very painful infected lymph node which drains the area where the flea bite occurred) to the bloodstream. The bacteremia can cause a coagulopathy producing the purpura seen in the ""Black Plague"" and also spread to the lung causing a hemorrhagic pneumonia that can facilitate person-to-person transmission. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/181>.]
