Public Health Services, Epidemiology and Immunizations Services Branch [edited]<http://www.sandiegocounty.gov/content/dam/sdc/hhsa/programs/phs/documents/09-12-2017.pdf>Update 6: Hepatitis A Virus Outbreak in San Diego County--------------------------------------------------------On [1 Sep 2017], the San Diego County Public Health Officer declared a local public health emergency due to the ongoing hepatitis A virus (HAV) outbreak in the county. The County Board of Supervisors ratified this declaration on [6 Sep 2017]. This health advisory updates local healthcare providers about the outbreak and provides updated recommendations and resources on HAV.Situation: As of [11 Sep 2017], 421 confirmed or probable HAV cases have been reported in an ongoing local outbreak in San Diego County. The cases had symptom onsets between [22 Nov 2016] and [8 Sep 2017]. A total of 292 (69 percent) of the cases have been hospitalized, and 16 patients (4 percent) have died. The cases range in age from 5 to 87 years (median equal 44 years), and 286 (68 percent) are male, with 2 (0.5 percent) self-identifying as MSM [men who have sex with men]. The only pediatric case is an unimmunized 5-year-old who was exposed by an ill family member.As many as 148 (36 percent) of the HAV cases are homeless and reported injection or non-injection illicit drug use, 71 (17 percent) were homeless only, 52 (12 percent) were illicit drug users only, 96 (23 percent) were neither homeless nor drug users, and 54 (13 percent) had an unknown status for homelessness and drug use. Of the 325 cases with test results available for review, 64 (20 percent) have chronic hepatitis C infection, and 17 (5 percent) have chronic hepatitis B infection. Despite the fact that the majority of the cases in this outbreak had a known indication for HAV immunization, none had been fully vaccinated prior to becoming ill. A small minority of patients had potentially prolonged exposure periods to individuals with HAV and became ill after receiving HAV vaccination as post-exposure prophylaxis. Most outbreak cases have been from downtown San Diego and from El Cajon, Santee, La Mesa, and the adjacent unincorporated areas, however, cases have been confirmed in all parts of the county. There are several clusters of epidemiologically associated cases, although no specific common food, beverage, or drug sources have been identified. Case clusters have been reported in individuals who have used the same homeless services providers and in the following locations with shared restrooms: jails, single room occupancy hotels, residential drug treatment facilities, group homes, and assisted living facilities. A total of 4 healthcare workers have contracted HAV in this outbreak, as have 6 food handlers, although no 2ary cases have resulted from the individuals working in these sensitive occupations.The CDC has confirmed HAV RNA in serum samples of 265 outbreak cases. Viral sequencing indicates that 13 unique, closely related strains of HAV genotype 1B are involved. These strains are different than those associated with the 1B strains in an ongoing HAV outbreak in Southeastern Michigan and the multistate outbreaks, including California, linked to frozen strawberries in 2016 and pomegranate arils in 2013. The main outbreak strain in San Diego is identical to one of the strains causing an ongoing HAV outbreak in Santa Cruz County.Investigations of the confirmed and probable cases, as well as 35 suspect cases, are ongoing. Not included in the local outbreak totals are 24 HAV cases reported in 2017 that are travel-related or have non-outbreak genotypes. Of note, one case was diagnosed with symptomatic HAV infection 4 weeks after a trip to Paris, and viral sequence analysis indicated that the HAV strain causing his infection is identical to the one causing an outbreak among MSM in France.Background: Person-to-person transmission through the fecal-oral route is the primary means of HAV transmission in the USA. Most infections result from close personal contact with an infected household member or sexual partner, or their fecally contaminated environment. Contaminated hands may play a significant role in the direct and indirect spread of HAV. Common-source outbreaks and sporadic cases can also occur from exposure to fecally contaminated food or water. According to CDC, individuals are infectious from up to 2 weeks before symptom onset to 1 week after. However some data suggest that individuals may be infectious for longer.Individuals with increased risk for HAV infection include: travelers to countries with high or intermediate endemicity of HAV, MSM, users of injection and non-injection illicit drugs, persons with clotting factor disorders, and persons working with nonhuman primates. HAV outbreaks have been reported among drug users and the homeless, who have a higher morbidity and mortality, when compared with the general population, and an increased risk of infection due to poor living conditions. Individuals with chronic liver conditions, such as hepatitis B or C, are also recommended to get HAV vaccination because of their increased morbidity and mortality risks should they contract HAV.  Recommendations for Providers: 1. Consider HAV infection in individuals, especially homeless individuals and those who use illicit drugs, with discrete symptom onset and jaundice or elevated liver function tests. Symptoms of concern include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, fever, malaise, dark urine, light-colored stool, and abdominal pain. Relapsing hepatitis can occur after apparent recovery from initial illness in up to 20 percent of cases. Patients experiencing relapsing hepatitis can be contagious and multiple relapses can occur up to 6 months after initial infection. Cholestatic hepatitis mimicking gallbladder disease can also occur up to 5 percent of cases. A complete serology panel with testing for hepatitis A, B, and C is recommended in symptomatic patients. HIV testing is also recommended for those with an undocumented HIV-status. Serologic testing for HAV infection is not recommended in asymptomatic individuals or as screening before vaccination.2. Promptly report all suspected and confirmed HAV cases to the Epidemiology Program. Please fax Confidential Morbidity Report (CMRa), or call 619-692-8499 (Monday-Friday, 8 AM-5 PM), or 858-565-5255 (after hours, during weekends, and on County-observed holidays). Since this outbreak involves homeless individuals, providers are urged to contact the Epidemiology Program while suspected cases are still at the healthcare facility. This action will ensure that a public health investigator can interview the patient by phone for a risk history and will facilitate serum specimen submission to the San Diego County Public Health Laboratory for possible genotyping. Patients who are potentially contagious should be discharged from a facility only after being given clear instructions on how to prevent the spread of the disease. People who are homeless should be provided temporary shelter with a restroom that is either private or shared with individuals known to be HAV immune.3. Provide post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for close contacts of confirmed HAV cases. Susceptible people exposed to HAV should receive a dose of single-antigen HAV vaccine, intramuscular (IM) immune globulin (IG) (0.1 mL/kg), or both, as soon as possible within 2 weeks of last exposure. The PEP dosage of IG was recently increased and is higher than that noted in the package insert. The efficacy of combined HAV/Hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccine (Twinrix) for PEP has not been evaluated, so it is not recommended for PEP. Detailed information on PEP may be found on the CDPH Hepatitis A PEP Guidance Quicksheet (updated July 2017) and the CDPH Hepatitis A PEP IG Administration Quicksheet (updated August 2017).4. Provide HAV vaccine to homeless individuals, illicit drug users, patients with chronic liver diseases, MSM, and other at-risk people who are not already immunized, and to any individual who desires immunity to HAV. The first dose of single-antigen HAV vaccine (Havrix, Vaqta) appears to protect more persons than the first dose of the combined HAV/HBV (Twinrix) vaccine (see table 3 package insert), but efficacy is comparable after completion of the respective series. Providers should consider short-term risks of exposure to HAV, the likelihood of follow-up to complete immunization, and the need for protection from HBV when selecting vaccines for those at risk. Immunization against HAV with existing supplies should not be delayed to obtain a different formulation of vaccine. Providers who do not have available vaccine may direct patients to call 2-1-1 San Diego to locate the nearest County Public Health Center, clinic, or pharmacy that can provide the vaccine. Providers who care for homeless and/or drug-using individuals may contact the Immunization Program at 619-692-5607 (Mon-Fri, 8 AM-5 PM) to learn how to obtain 317-funded HAV vaccine for use during this outbreak. Homeless individuals and illicit drug users are also at higher risk for other vaccine preventable diseases and should be brought up-to-date with recommended vaccines per the relevant CDC immunization schedule. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices routinely recommends HAV vaccination for various at-risk groups and ""for any person wishing to obtain immunity."" Under the Affordable Care Act, HAV vaccines are covered as preventive care without a deductible or copay. Adult HAV vaccination is covered by Medi-Cal without prior authorization. Providers should check the San Diego Immunization Registry to see if patients are already vaccinated and note any vaccinations given.5. Provide HAV vaccination to individuals who have frequent, ongoing close contact with homeless individuals and illicit drug users, and to all food handlers in San Diego County. The County Public Health Officer strongly recommends HAV vaccination for individuals with ongoing, close contact with homeless and illicit drug using individuals in San Diego County. This local recommendation is being made due to the current outbreak and includes persons working in health care, public safety, sanitation, homeless shelters, and homeless and behavioral service provider agencies. The County Public Health Officer strongly recommends HAV vaccination for all food handlers in San Diego County. This local recommendation is being made to reduce the potential risk of an ill food handler transmitting HAV to others.6. Encourage those who are planning an international trip to check the CDC Travelers' Health website and to obtain recommended vaccinations before travel. High-risk areas for HAV include parts of Africa and Asia, and moderate-risk areas include Central and South America, Eastern Europe, and parts of Asia. There are currently HAV outbreaks associated with MSM occurring in New York City, Colorado, and Western Europe, notably France, Portugal, and Spain. MSM should be vaccinated against HAV, especially prior to travel, and be instructed on prevention measures for HAV and other sexually transmitted illnesses.7. Ensure that all healthcare workers use standard precautions in patient care to protect themselves against HAV. HAV, like norovirus, is a non-enveloped virus, and it may be similarly difficult to inactivate in the environment. Alcohol-based hand rubs and typically-used surface disinfectants may not be effective. Therefore, additional precautions to take include:- Wash hands with soap and running water for at least 20 seconds after providing care for an HAV patient.- Use contact precautions in the care of diapered or incontinent HAV patients.- Wash hands with soap and running water for at least 20 seconds before eating and after using a restroom.- Use employee-designated restrooms when available, and do not touch the door handle directly when exiting a restroom.- Do not eat in patient care areas and never share food, drink or cigarettes with patients.- Perform environmental cleaning in areas housing HAV patients with bleach products or other products effective against norovirus.- HAV vaccine is strongly recommended for unvaccinated healthcare workers caring for HAV patients or individuals at risk for HAV. The vaccine should be available and encouraged for other unvaccinated healthcare personnel concerned about increased exposure to HAV.--Communicated by:Dr. Eric McDonaldSan Diego County Health Department<eric.mcdonald@sdcounty.ca.gov>[ProMED thanks Dr. McDonald for this posting. Clearly, San Diego has been very upfront in reporting this ongoing outbreak of hepatitis A. The parallel but unrelated outbreak in eastern Michigan has not precipitated as much reporting, but my contacts in the area have underscored that cases are continuing with hospitalizations and deaths in the Detroit area. An updated epicurve is included in this posting which reflects that the outbreak is continuing at a similar rate. It is not clear if the substantial number of deaths (16 to this point) have had particular risk factors such as chronic hepatitis B or C or HIV. It is interesting that several health care workers (HCW) are part of the cluster. It is not stated if the HCWs had cared for a known case of HAV infection. While it is true that contagiousness continues for at least a week into overt illness, the peak time for transmission appears to be prior to overt illness. - Mod.LL]******[2] CommentDate: Wed 13 Sep 2017From: Leslie N. Jabine <ljabine@uic.edu> [edited]Regarding Hepatitis A - USA - fatal:------------------------------------The cases among patients with hepatitis B and C should stand as a reminder that these patients need to be screened for immunity to hepatitis A and be vaccinated, if need be. These patients may have been missed due to not seeking medical care and potentially speaks to role of homeless outreach in population health.--Leslie Jabine, MDUniversity of Illinois at Chicago[ProMED thanks Dr. Jabine for underscoring the need to assess HAV immunity in patients with chronic hepatitis. - Mod.LL]******[3] Santa Cruz CountyDate: Tue 12 Sep 2017, 6:02 PM PDT Source: Santa Cruz Sentinel [edited]<http://www.santacruzsentinel.com/health/20170912/hepatitis-a-outbreak-confirmed-in-boulder-creek-dozens-get-free-vaccine>Highly contagious hepatitis A has popped up in Boulder Creek, prompting Santa Cruz County health officials to offer a free vaccination clinic [Tue 12 Sep 2017] afternoon, where dozens of people lined up for a shot. ""We're up to 71 cases (in the county),"" Dr. Arnold Leff, the county's public health officer, told county supervisors. ""We have the largest rate of hepatitis A in the state.""The Santa Cruz County outbreak started in April 2017 with a handful of cases at the county jail. Leff said 67 of the local hepatitis A cases relate to drug use or being homeless ""where they have limited sanitation capacity.""One case is related to a laundromat, he said, noting no cases in South County. Leff said county health staff have been reaching out to ""vulnerable populations"" to offer vaccination, which can prevent the infection. On [Sat 9 Sep 2017], a county Health Services announcement advised: ""It is possible that you have been exposed to hepatitis A virus if you have consumed food prepared at Boulder Creek Redwood Keg Liquor and Deli between [15 Aug 2017] and [7 Sep 2017].""The county, which posts restaurant inspections, had given Redwood Keg a clean bill of health after a routine inspection on [8 Jun 2017]. A liquor store with a deli known for tri-tip sandwiches, Redwood Keg closed for 2 half-days last week because of the outbreak.""It didn't come from the deli,"" said the owner. ""It came from my daughter. She's bipolar and living in my garage. She tested positive."" The owner and his wife got vaccinated and went back to work, but after a couple of days, the wife wasn't feeling well and went to the doctor. ""She tested positive,"" the owner said, comparing the illness to a bad stomach flu. ""She lost about 10 pounds. It beat her up pretty good."" With the positive test came the order to clean.[Byline: Jondi Gumz]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Even though there are 421 cases reported in San Diego county and only 71 cases in Santa Cruz county (about 460 miles to the north of San Diego county), based on the 2012 census numbers, San Diego county had 3 176 138 persons and Santa Cruz only 266 508. Therefore the rate of acute hepatitis A is 13.25/100 000 population in San Diego county but twice that; 26.6/100 000, in Santa Cruz county. It is not clear if there have been any deaths in Santa Cruz County. - Mod.LLThe state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>. San Diego County and Santa Cruz county can be seen on the map at <http://geology.com/county-map/california-county-map.gif>. - Copy.Ed.AO]
