El Comercio [in Spanish, machine trans. edited]<http://elcomercio.pe/lima/sucesos/nina-queda-grave-sufrir-infeccion-extrana-bacteria-noticia-455963>In the ""San Camilo"" pavilion of Dos de Mayo Hospital, the 3 children who share a room with a 4th are awake and talk to their families. The youngest girl, who has lost her speech and strength to move, at age 3 is the survivor of the only case reported so far in Peru of infection by an unusual bacterium. In less than 2 months, she has suffered from failure of her organs, widespread infection and necrosis in her hands and feet. The girl, a native of Tingo Maria (Huanuco), has been hospitalized in Dos de Mayo since last 20 Jul 2017, but her health problems began at least 2 months earlier.Her parents said that due to her constant fever and anemia, she was taken to the Tingo Maria hospital on 13 Jul 2017, from where, 6 days later, she was referred to Lima with a diagnosis of sepsis (generalized infection), neurological sequelae, severe anemia and malnutrition.Walter Pena, head of the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (UCI) of the hospital, explained to El Comercio that due to the seriousness of her condition, she was 13 days in the emergency service and 14 in the ICU. During this time, she developed pulmonary hemorrhage, hemothorax (blood in the pleura), respiratory failure, septic shock, liver failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation, resulting in necrosis in the left foot and 2 fingers of each hand. ""When there is a widespread infection along the way, the organs begin to fail,"" he said. He added that the state of anemia in which the child was found aggravated the situation. It should be noted that in Huanuco, 35.7 percent of children suffer from this condition.According to the Hospital Dos de Mayo, the agent that caused the generalized infection and the multiorgan failure is the bacterium _Elizabethkingia meningoseptica_. The place and moment where one acquires it is not clear. Biologist Jesus Rojas Jaimes, a research professor at the Universidad CientÌ fica del Sur, explained that this bacterium can be found in water, soil and in the hospital setting. ""It could be part of the human microbiome, but it is not usual,"" he remarked to El Comercio.Dr. Ciro Maguina Vargas, Vice Chancellor of Research of the University Cayetano Heredia, pointed out that its main characteristic is that it is ""opportunistic in hospital infections"" and has remarkable resistance to antimicrobials. ""It has been registered in hospitals where antimicrobial resistance is high,"" he added. The most likely to be affected by it are patients with low defenses, neonates, older adults, ICU boarders and patients in whom invasive devices (catheters) have been used.""It is an unusual bacterium and may be in the environment, not necessarily in the sierra or jungle."" This is the 1st time this bacterium has been reported in Dos de Mayo Hospital,"" said Cristhian Resurrection, Infectious Diseases physician at Hospital Dos de Mayo.-- Communicated by:ProMED-ESP<promed@promedmail.org>[After the cluster of infections with _E. anophelis_ in Wisconsin and Illinois in the winter of 2015-2016, it became clear that this relatively newly described potentially lethal pathogen was difficult to distinguish from the prototype of the species _E. meningoseptica_, formerly _Flavobacterium_ (and then _Chryseobacterium_) meningosepticum_. Of note, _anophelis_ seems to be more community-acquired, whereas _meningoseptica_ is healthcare-associated. This piece in Slate was written as a good review,<http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2016/04/elizabethkingia_bacteria_strain_could_cure_malaria_but_it_s_also_sickened.html>:""Back in 1948, Milton Berle had a TV show where he'd greet his audience with ""Good evening, ladies and germs!"" This was considered hysterically funny, and so absurd: Germs were thought to be bit players in the great drama of humanity, newly kept in line by antibiotics. But in the last 10 years, new ways of identifying bacteria genetically have turned the joke on its head. Technically, 60 percent of Berle's audience was germs, because it's now clear that a person consists of approximately 30 trillion cells of us and 40 trillion cells of ""them.""In a shift similar to when we realized that the sun did not revolve around the Earth, our place on the planet has turned inside out: We live in the germs' world, now. Increasingly, new diseases are textbook cases of how our old textbooks didn't describe our real relationship to microbes.Take _Elizabethkingia anophelis_, which has mysteriously sickened 61 people, mostly in Wisconsin, since last fall [2015]. All were already ill. 20 people have died, which is a very high rate. _Elizabethkingia anophelis_ is found in dirt, in mosquito guts, and pretty much everywhere else. The CDC has sent epidemiologists to Wisconsin, Illinois, and Michigan, and they've interviewed survivors, tested fellow patients, and even collected samples of skin care products used by those infected, without finding a clear mode of transmission or a thread connecting one infection to another. Exploring the history of what we do and don't know about _E. anophelis_ tells a story about the curious mix of hope and danger in our bacterial companions.The _Elizabethkingia_ bacterial genus was 1st discovered by Elizabeth O. King, a CDC microbiologist, in 1959. Using fluid from the spinal cords of children, many of whom had died of meningitis between 1948 to 1958, she isolated the likely cause under her microscope: bacteria with ""slender, slightly curved rods. Short, straight forms with rounded ends are also present."" She grew colonies of them on Petri dishes, where they appeared ""smooth, entire, glistening, gray-white and butyrous,"" which means butterfly-like. She found what they were capable of by subjecting them to chemical tests and antibiotics, and then injected them in rabbits, mice, and hamsters. Elizabeth King's original name for the genus referenced its yellowish color (_Flavobacterium_), and the name for its species referenced the infant meningitis it was associated with (meningosepticum). But in 2005, the genus was renamed _Elizabethkingia_ after her.Until 2008, _Elizabethkingia_ kept a pretty low profile. It was associated with the occasional case of meningitis, scattered in different countries, but otherwise not much thought was given to these rod-shaped bacteria. And then, Swedish malaria researcher Ingrid Faye identified another strain of _Elizabethkingia_ in the gut of a mosquito in Africa in 2008. Named after the mosquito [_Anopheles gambiae_], the bacteria was called _Elizabethkingia anophelis_.These days, microbiologists don't spend much time describing the shape of bacteria, or how they look in a Petri dish. Instead they sequence their genes, which is exactly what Jiannong Xu, an associate professor at New Mexico State University, did. By analyzing its genes in 2011, Xu and his team came to understand that _E. anophelis_ is a key player in the termite's gut, which made it a potential player in the fight against malaria.In fact, if you were a mosquito in the market for a gut-residing bacteria, you'd hire _E. anophelis_ straightaway! This strain of bacteria contains genes that help break down blood cells. And then, because digesting blood can lead to oxygen poisoning, _E. anophelis_ ingeniously makes antioxidants, too. But day to day, when the mosquito is just feeding on sugary nectar, the bacteria helps digest that. And finally, it has a large bag of tricks that make it resistant to antibiotics: a thick cell wall, special pumps that push toxins out of the cell, a set of genes that short-circuit many common antibiotics, a whole toolkit for avoiding death.I asked Xu why these bacteria have such powerful antibiotic capabilities. ""The mosquito's gut is a collection of bugs inside a bug: a world inside a world,"" he said. The gut bacteria have evolved to live together and kill harmful invaders. They've divided up the tasks: Some members of the community have strong antibiotic properties themselves, to slay the enemy, so the antibiotic resistance genes essentially protect the gut's traditional residents from their own weapons.Xu has spent the past 20 years studying how mosquitoes' immune systems work, which is much more than an academic question. When they take blood from humans, female mosquitoes take on malaria-causing parasites without damaging their own immune systems, incubate the parasites, and pass them back to humans. There has long been a hope that we could either encourage mosquitoes to breed less enthusiastically, kill the malaria parasites themselves, or engineer some other biological change that would lessen the threat of malaria. In any case, the benefits of understanding this immune process are large: Malaria kills 1.2 million people every year, and about half the world is vulnerable to catching it. Initially, it looked as if manipulating _E. anophelis_ might be a good way to keep malaria in check, and Xu got a grant to do just that.Once scientists knew how to identify _E. anophelis_, though, it started showing up in surprising places: in a sick newborn in Bangui, Central African Republic in 2011, then an intensive care unit in Singapore, and then in 2 babies in Hong Kong. Scientists determined that some cases were spread from mother to infant, but not by mosquitoes, despite its name and coziness with the insect. Meanwhile, since 2004, epidemiologists had noticed that cases of the original _Elizabethkingia meningoseptica_ seemed to be rising among babies and people with weak immune systems in hospital settings, where the bacteria's large set of genes for antibiotic resistance were a clear advantage.So who was the real _E. anophelis_? Had the bacteria suddenly changed to infect humans, or had it been the bad bug all along? When the CDC reanalyzed some past infections that had seemed like _meningoseptica_, they realized they were actually _anophelis_. ""It's difficult to draw conclusions about the history of _E. anophelis_ since it was just identified as a separate species in 2011,"" said John McQuiston, who is the team lead in the CDC's Special Bacteriology Reference Laboratory, via email. He added that there is no evidence that the infection is spread via mosquito bites.The story of _Elizabethkingia anophelis_ is typical of the paradox we're now in: Since 2008, we've doubled the genetic data we have about our world every 7 months. Genomic data is growing much faster than Moore's law -- which says that computer speeds double every 18 months -- and even more than our count of stars. It's gotten to the point where some biologists want to replace the phrase ""astronomical growth"" with ""genomic growth."" But more data open up more questions than they answer.And genes are just one part of the new information we have: The Internet brings us news of infections in places we never thought to look. Mosquitoes and diseases also are traveling farther and faster, by boat, by plane, as well as with a changing climate. (They could even be traveling by hand cream!) But understanding how these places are connected by these ubiquitous bacteria will take much longer.Amid this bounty of high-tech discovery, it's important to remember that new technology is not the answer to every problem. I asked New Mexico's Xu how his anti-malarial research was going. He said that _E. anophelis_ had proved hard to work with, though another team had made some progress. And he sounded a bit skeptical. ""It's relatively easy to engineer bacteria, but we don't know whether it would work in nature. We know what mosquitoes do in the lab, but we don't have an ecological sense of how they acquire bacteria, and we need that information."" In the meantime, it had become clear that there was a simpler solution to reducing malaria, mixing sugary mosquito bait with a toxic chemical seemed to kill mosquitoes more cheaply, and with fewer complications, than re-engineering their guts. ""In general, low-tech works better than high-tech,"" Xu said with a laugh."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/10>.]
