bioRxiv [edited]<http://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/09/08/186155.article-info>Dawn Dudley, Christina Newman, Joseph Lalli, Laurel Stewart, Michelle Koening, Andrea Weiler, et al. Infection via mosquito bite alters Zika virus replication kinetics in rhesus macaques.AbstractFor more than 3 decades, it has been recognized that small amounts of vector saliva can significantly alter the infectivity of vector-borne pathogens and subsequent in vivo dynamics. Mouse and nonhuman primate models now serve as useful platforms to study Zika virus (ZIKV) pathogenesis, candidate therapies, and vaccines, but they rely on needle inoculation of virus: the effects of mosquito-borne infection on disease outcome have not been explored in these models. To model vector-borne transmission of ZIKV in nonhuman primates, we infected _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes with ZIKV and allowed them to feed on 4 ZIKV-naive rhesus macaques. We compared ZIKV replication kinetics and tissue distribution between animals that were subcutaneously inoculated with 104 plaque-forming units of ZIKV and those that were exposed via mosquito bite. Here, we show that infection via mosquito bite delays ZIKV replication to peak viral loads in rhesus macaques. Importantly, in mosquito-infected animals ZIKV tissue distribution was limited to hemolymphatic tissues, female reproductive tract tissues, kidney, and liver, potentially emulating key features of human ZIKV infections, most of which are characterized by mild or asymptomatic disease. This newly developed system will be valuable for studying ZIKV disease because it more closely mimics human infection by mosquito bite than needle-based inoculations.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Mosquito bites, with injection of biologically reactive saliva, are different in terms of placement in tissues and host reaction than syringe injection. It is not surprising that initiation of the early cycles of virus replication of mosquito-injected virus is different compared to syringe-injected virus. - Mod.TY]******[3] Spread in BrazilDate: Sat 9 Sep 2017Source: eLIFE [edited]<https://elifesciences.org/articles/29820>Reference: Jose Louren̤o, Maricelia Maia de Lima Nuno Rodrigues Faria, Andrew Walker, Moritz UG Kraemer, et al. Epidemiological and ecological determinants of Zika virus transmission in an urban setting.AbstractThe Zika virus has emerged as a global public health concern. Its rapid geographic expansion is attributed to the success of _Aedes_ mosquito vectors, but local epidemiological drivers are still poorly understood. Feira de Santana [city] played a pivotal role in the Chikungunya epidemic in Brazil and was one of the 1st urban centres to report Zika infections. Using a climate-driven transmission model and notified Zika case data, we show that a low observation rate and high vectorial capacity translated into a significant attack rate during the 2015 outbreak, with a subsequent decline in 2016 and fade-out in 2017 due to herd-immunity. We find a potential Zika-related, low risk for microcephaly per pregnancy, but with significant public health impact given high attack rates. The balance between the loss of herd-immunity and viral re-importation will dictate future transmission potential of in this urban setting.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@romedmail.org>[It would not be surprising to see Zika virus persist in the population with low levels of transmission in the face of substantial herd immunity, in much the same way that the dengue and chikungunya viruses do as new, susceptible individuals are added to the population over time. There is an unanswered question regarding persistence of Zika virus in Brazil or other tropical countries where the virus outbreak has occurred: Is there reliable evidence that the virus has become established in populations of non-human primates in the same way that yellow fever virus has? - Mod.TY]******[4] 1st outbreak in USADate: Thu 14 Sep 2017Source: Euro Surveillance [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22874>Marini G, Guzzetta G, Rosa R, Merler S. 1st outbreak of Zika virus in the continental United States: a modelling analysis.Since 2015, Zika virus (ZIKV) has spread throughout Latin and Central America. This emerging infectious disease has been causing considerable public health concern because of severe neurological complications, especially in newborns after congenital infections. In July 2016, the 1st outbreak in the continental United States was identified in the Wynwood neighbourhood of Miami-Dade County, Florida. In this work, we investigated transmission dynamics using a mathematical model calibrated to observed data on mosquito abundance and symptomatic human infections. We found that, although ZIKV transmission was detected in July 2016, the 1st importation may have occurred between March and mid-April. The estimated highest value for R0 was 2.73 (95 percent confidence interval (CI): 1.65-4.17); the attack rate was 14 percent (95 percent CI: 5.6-27.4 percent), with 15 (95 percent CI: 6-29) pregnant women involved and a 12 percent probability of infected blood donations. Vector control avoided 60 percent of potential infections. According to our results, it is likely that further ZIKV outbreaks identified in other areas of Miami-Dade County were seeded by commuters to Wynwood rather than by additional importation from international travellers. Our study can help prepare future outbreak-related interventions in European areas where competent mosquitoes for ZIKV transmission are already established.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It will be interesting to see whether this model works well for other outbreaks. There is a small chikungunya virus outbreak going on in Italy currently (see Chikungunya (30): Americas, Europe, Asia, research 20170912.5310090). Perhaps the model can be tested there as well. - Mod.TY]******[5] Visual impairment in childrenDate: Wed 13 Sep 2017Source: Medical News [edited]<https://www.news-medical.net/news/20170913/Research-finds-serious-visual-impairment-among-children-with-congenital-Zika-syndrome.aspx>100 percent of Brazilian infants with confirmed and suspected Zika included in 2 new studies published in the Journal of AAPOS were born with vision problems.Although one of the most serious consequences of the Zika virus (ZIKV) in infants is microcephaly, there is a broad collection of anomalies now known as congenital Zika syndrome (CZS). Some of the most serious are ophthalmologic, including macular scarring, retinal defects, low visual acuity, strabismus, and nystagmus. The 2 papers published in the Journal of the American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus (AAPOS) evaluated visual function among infants with suspected and confirmed CZS. Both studies found that while about 40 percent of patients had ocular abnormalities, 100 percent of children tested had visual impairment. Thus, cortical visual impairment might be the most common cause of blindness among children with CZS.In a study conducted in Brazil, 70 infants with microcephaly were examined at CAVIVER, a nongovernmental organization clinic and referral center dedicated to visually disabled children in Fortaleza. A team of ophthalmologists, neurologists, geneticists, and pediatricians, led by Marcia B. Tartarella, MD, PhD, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, evaluated the infants from January to May 2016. Of those, 25 had ophthalmologic changes: 18 with intraocular abnormalities, including macular chorioretinal atrophy, mottled retinal pigment epithelium, and optic nerve pallor; 7 with strabismus or nystagmus without intraocular abnormalities. The 11 infants who could be tested for visual acuity, were all below normal range. Investigators noted that although they could not obtain specific serological tests that would confirm ZIKV infection in these patients, all were screened for other infectious conditions that could cause microcephaly.According to Dr. Tartarella, ""All systemic and ocular characteristics of CZS do not necessarily occur in the same patient. The ophthalmic features with unique anatomical characteristics may help to identify CZS in patients born without microcephaly.""Another study, which included 32 infants born in Pernambuco, Brazil from May to December 2015 with confirmed ZIKV infection, found visual impairment in all patients. Of these, 14 patients exhibited retinal and/or optic nerve damage and had neuroimaging or neurological abnormalities detected at birth. Of the mothers, 26 reported symptoms or signs compatible with ZIKV infection during their pregnancies, 13 during the 1st trimester, 9 during the second, and 3 in the third. The mothers had infants that were born full-term while 6 were pre-term.However, according to lead investigator Liana O. Ventura, MD, PhD, of the Altino Ventura Foundation (FAV), and the Department of Ophthalmology, HOPE Eye Hospital, Recife, Brazil, such retinal involvement is not always present. ""Surprisingly, the present study revealed that, regardless of fundus involvement, all infants presented with visual impairment, suggesting that the visual impairment is most likely related to the extensive damage to the central nervous system. These findings reinforce our supposition that brain damage is the main etiology for visual impairment in CZS.""In an accompanying editorial, Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, and co-authors suggest that as our knowledge of the effects of Zika virus infection evolves, we can learn from the experience with rubella infection during pregnancy. Beginning with an astute observation in 1941 by ophthalmologist Norman Gregg, followed by descriptions of a wide array of manifestations, the full effects of congenital rubella infection became understood.Dr. Rasmussen explains, ""Limited data are available regarding the rate of ophthalmologic findings in infants born to women with ZIKV infection during pregnancy. As most studies have only carefully examined infants with presumed or confirmed congenital ZIKV infection who have microcephaly, more studies are needed to understand ocular findings in those infants with congenital ZIKV infection without microcephaly. In addition, it is unknown how often infants born without recognizable abnormalities of ZIKV infection will later develop problems (e.g., cognitive impairment, hearing loss, ocular findings), as has been seen with other congenital infections, for example, rubella.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The teratogenic effects of in utero Zika virus infection become clearer with these studies of neonates. The tragic social effects of CZS children is becoming clearer as well. Many affected children will not only have limited cognitive development, they may have serious visual problems as well, making their care, perhaps for a lifetime, even more difficult for their families. - Mod.TY]******[6] Persistence in tearsDate: Mon 11 Sep 2017Source: Scientific Reports [edited]<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-09479-5>Jeslin J. L. Tan, Praveen K. Balne, Yee-Sin Leo, Louis Tong, Lisa F. P. Ng, Rupesh Agrawal. Persistence of Zika virus in conjunctival fluid of convalescence patients.AbstractA widespread epidemic of Zika fever, caused by Zika virus (ZIKAV) has spread throughout the Pacific islands, the Americas and Southeast Asia. The increased incidences of ocular anomalies observed in ZIKAV-infected infants and adults may be associated with the rapid spread of ZIKAV. The objective of this study was to check if ZIKAV could be detected in human tears after the 1st week of infection. Enrolled in the study were 29 patients with PCR confirmed ZIKAV infection during the Singapore August 2016 ZIKAV outbreak. Detection and quantification of ZIKAV RNA was performed on conjunctival swabs collected from both eyes of these patients at the late convalescent phase (30 days post-illness). Efficiency of viral isolation from swab samples was confirmed by the limit of detection (as low as 0.1 PFU/uL, equivalent to copy number of 4.9) in spiked swabs with different concentrations of ZIKAV (PFU/uL). Samples from 3 patients were found positive by qRT-PCR for ZIKAV and the viral RNA copy numbers detected in conjunctival swabs ranged from 5.2 to 9.3 copies respectively. ZIKAV could persist in the tears of infected patients for up to 30 days post-illness, and may therefore possess a potential public health risk of transmission.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[It is difficult to assess the risk of Zika virus transmission to susceptible individuals via tears. It would be of interest to test the tears of infants with congenital Zika syndrome (CZS) for presence of Zika virus, many of whom have eye lesions (as noted in the report above). There are anecdotal reports of CZS infants with microcephaly crying incessantly, a source of abundant tears. - Mod.TY]******[7] Exposure variabilityDate: Thu 14 Sep 2017Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005851>AbstractBackgroundZika virus transmission dynamics in urban environments follow a complex spatiotemporal pattern that appears unpredictable and barely related to high mosquito density areas. In this context, human activity patterns likely have a major role in Zika transmission dynamics. This paper examines the effect of host variability in the amount of time spent outdoors on Zika epidemiology in an urban environment.Methodology/Principal findings1st, we performed a survey on time spent outdoors by residents of Miami-Dade County, Florida. 2nd, we analyzed both the survey and previously published national data on outdoors time in the U.S. to provide estimates of the distribution of the time spent outdoors. 3rd, we performed a computational modeling evaluation of Zika transmission dynamics, based on the time spent outdoors by each person. Our analysis reveals a strong heterogeneity of the host population in terms of time spent outdoors-data are well captured by skewed gamma distributions. Our model-based evaluation shows that in a heterogeneous population, Zika would cause a lower number of infections than in a more homogenous host population (up to 4-fold differences), but, at the same time, the epidemic would spread much faster. We estimated that in highly heterogeneous host populations the timing of the implementation of vector control measures is the major factor for limiting the number of Zika infections.Conclusions/SignificanceOur findings highlight the need of considering host variability in exposure time for managing mosquito-borne infections and call for the revision of the triggers for vector control strategies, which should integrate mosquito density data and human outdoor activity patterns in specific areas.Author summaryZika spread in urban environments is characterized by complicated spatio-temporal patterns, likely linked not only to mosquito density but also to human activity patterns. We conducted a survey on Miami-Dade County residents on time spent outdoors. We then analyzed the Miami-Dade survey data and previously published activity data on the entire U.S. population. Our findings indicate high variability in the amount of time spent outdoors by individual residents. Specifically, we found that the majority of persons spend little time outdoors whereas a few people spend a large amount of time outdoors. This analysis was further elaborated in a modeling framework, showing the effect of the host variability in outdoor time on relevant epidemiological indicators (such as the total number of cases and epidemic timing of spread). Our investigation reveals that when host variability in time spent outdoors is high, Zika will infect fewer people. However, it will spread at a quicker pace than in homogenous host populations (where all people spend nearly the same amount of time outdoors). This information is instrumental for defining new triggers for vector control measures based on both mosquito vector density data and human activity patterns in different areas.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall
