Today [edited]<https://www.today.ng/news/nigeria/14909/fed-govt-confirms-outbreak-yellow-fever>The Federal Government has confirmed a case of yellow fever in a young girl in Oke Owa Community, Ifelodun Local Government Area of Kwara State.According to the Minister of Health, Prof Isaac Adewole, laboratory diagnosis was carried out at the Lagos University Teaching Hospital and confirmed at the Institut Pasteur, Dakar, Senegal on [Tue 12 Sep 2017].He said following the confirmation of the case, the State Epidemiology Team has begun investigation in the affected area and surrounding communities. ""A joint Team from the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control, National Primary Health Care Development Agency and the World Health Organisation Country Office has been deployed to support the State in carrying out a detailed investigation and risk analysis.""An Outbreak Control Team has also been constituted to ensure rapid and coordinated decision-making,"" Director, Press and Public Relations, Mrs Boade Akinola, said in a statement.Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected _Aedes_ mosquitoes. Symptoms include fever, headache, jaundice, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting and fatigue. Some infected people may not experience any of these symptoms. In severe cases, bleeding may occur from the mouth, nose, eyes or stomach.The Minister of Health, has assured that all the Agencies of the Federal Ministry of Health and their partners will work together to support the Government of Kwara to respond in order to prevent further spread.A vaccination campaign is already being planned in the affected area to prevent further spread.The most important measure to take in preventing Yellow Fever is vaccination against the disease. A single dose of Yellow Fever vaccine, which is included in Nigeria's routine immunisation schedule given at 9-months is free, and sufficient to confer sustained protection of up to 10 years.'Other methods of prevention include using insect repellent, sleeping under a long-lasting insecticide treated net, ensuring proper sanitation and getting rid of stagnant water or breeding space for mosquitoes', Adewole said.Although there is no specific medicine to treat the disease, intensive supportive care is provided. Most patients would recover with appropriate care. Health care workers are strongly advised to practise universal care precautions while handling patients at all times. They are also urged to be alert and maintain a high index of suspicion.The Federal Ministry of Health, its agencies and partners will provide all the support needed to the Kwara State Ministry of Health to respond to this outbreak.The Health Minister has therefore called for calm and advised everyone to avoid self-medication but report at the nearest health facility if feel unwell.[Byline: Yemisi Adeolu]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Even the 1st single case of yellow fever (YF) in an area is of significant concern. If the area where the girl was infected has significant populations of _Aedes aegypti_ vector mosquitoes, ongoing transmission could occur and an outbreak could quickly get out-of-hand as it did in Angola in 2016. In 2012, Nigerian health authorities said that 30 years after the last yellow fever epidemic outbreak in the country, no nationwide vaccination had been conducted since, stating that over 101 million Nigerians are at risk of being infected with the disease. No mention is made in the report above if that campaign was completed or of the proportion of the local population that has been vaccinated where the girl was infected. One hopes that the Outbreak Control Team is able to respond quickly, initiate a vaccination campaign and prevent further transmission. Unfortunately, there has been a problem with the sale of fake YF vaccination cards in Nigeria in the recent past. One hopes that that practice was limited and does not complicate assessment of vaccination coverage in the area where the girl was affected.Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/nigeria.pdf> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/62>. - Mod.TY]
