County of San Diego Health and Human Services Agency [edited]<http://www.sandiegocounty.gov/content/sdc/hhsa/programs/phs/community_epidemiology/dc/Hepatitis_A.html>Since early 2017, the Public Health Services Division, in the County of San Diego Health and Human Services Agency, has been investigating a local Hepatitis A outbreak. The majority of people who have contracted hepatitis A are homeless and/or illicit drug users, although some cases have been neither. The outbreak is being spread person-to-person and through contact with a fecally contaminated environment. No common sources of food, beverage or drugs have been identified that have contributed to this outbreak, though investigation is ongoing. The CDC notes that person-to-person transmission through close contact is the primary way people get hepatitis A in the USA.Vaccination efforts are being implemented in targeted locations by County staff and in collaboration with health care partners. Health providers are asked to inform the Epidemiology Program if they have a patient suspected to have the hepatitis A infection, before the patient leaves the emergency department or provider's office. On 1 Sep 2017, the San Diego County Public Health Officer declared a local public health emergency due to the ongoing hepatitis A virus (HAV) outbreak in the county. The County Board of Supervisors ratified this declaration on 6 Sep 2017 and again on 12 Sep 2017. The declaration shall be ratified every 2 weeks by the County Board of Supervisors until the declaration is rescinded.The table below will provide a weekly update of total cases, deaths, and hospitalizations.San Diego County Hepatitis A Outbreak Cases and Deaths as of 19 Sep 2017------------------------------Cases / Deaths / Hospitalizations444 / 16 (3.6 percent) / 305 (69 percent)The table does not include all reported hepatitis A cases in the county, only those that are local-outbreak related. Also, data are provisional and subject to change.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall<promed@promedmail.org>[The number of cases of diagnosed hepatitis A (HAV) in San Diego County in southern California continues to increase.Date / Cases / Hospitalized (percentage) / Deaths (percentage)--------------------------------5 Apr 2017 / 39 / 33 (85) / 1 (3)4 May 2017 / 80 / 66 (83) / 3 (4)31 May 2017 / 133 / 103 (80) / 3 (2)12 Jun 2017 / 160 / 120 (75) / 4 (2.5)27 Jun 2017 / 196 / 142 (72) / 4 (2)26 Jul 2017 / 275 / 194 (71) / 7 (2.5)1 Aug 2017 / 295 / 202 (68) / 10 (3.4)8 Aug 2017 / 312 / 215 (69) / 10 (3.2)15 Aug 2017 / 333 / 232 (70) / 11 (3.3)22 Aug 2017 / 352 / 246 (70) / 14 (4)29 Aug 2017 / 378 / 263 (70) / 15 (4)5 Sep 2017 / 398 / 279 (70) / 15 (3.8)12 Sep 2017 / 421 / 292 (69) / 16 (3.8)19 Sep 2017 / 444 / 305 (69) / 16 (3.6) In the past week, 23 cases have been reported with no additional deaths. Since many cases of HAV infection are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice), the total number of cases is likely to have been significantly higher. The epicurve published several weeks ago (Hepatitis A - USA (20): (CA) fatal 20170817.5256184) showed that the outbreak is continuing at a relatively stable rate of about 20 new onset cases/week.The very high hospitalization rate may be related to the homelessness of the cohort but could represent a more virulent strain. HAV infection occurred in some individuals chronically infected with either hepatitis B or C, but it is not clear whether the deaths occurred in those individuals. Homelessness and illicit substance use seem to be relevant risk factors, while MSM [men who have sex with men] practices are not. It remains unclear how and from what vehicle the virus is spreading. No decrease seems to be occurring in the weekly number of newly reported cases. I would venture to say that 16 deaths from hepatitis A is the most in any US state for many years, let alone in 5.5 months.The San Diego County government is now recommending hepatitis A vaccination for food handlers. The vaccine recommendation has also been expanded to those who work in health care in addition to prior recommendations for those who work in public safety, sanitation, homeless shelters and behavioral and homeless service providers. The county has also set up handwashing stations in high risk areas. Given an incubation period of 15-45 days with a mean of 28 days, the immunizations, as well as increased environmental cleaning and hand washing stations, will take several weeks or more to have an effect, if at all. - Mod.LL]******[2] San Diego CountyDate: Tue 19 Sep 2017Source: Huffington Post [edited]<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/san-diego-homeless-hepatitis-outbreak_us_59c02b9fe4b0f22c4a8be47c>An outbreak of hepatitis A, a dangerous but preventable disease that is spread through fecal contamination and attacks the liver, has gotten so out of hand in San Diego that the county government is handing out plastic poop bags and washing the streets with bleach. The outbreak has killed 16 people and infected 421 since November 2016, ravaging San Diego's large homeless and illicit drug-using population. It could eventually cost the county health department up to a million dollars, a local health official estimated. But San Diego could have avoided its hepatitis A crisis, or at least ensured it didn't get this bad, if its homeless residents had better access to housing and the city provided the services they need to stay healthy, activists and public health experts say. The problem isn't limited to San Diego County, which has the 4th-largest homeless population in the USA, Detroit, Salt Lake City, Santa Cruz, California, and areas of Colorado are also dealing with hepatitis A outbreaks. The Los Angeles Acute Communicable Disease Control team told HuffPost that, while LA doesn't currently have an outbreak, officials are on the lookout. And because of the way the disease spreads, all it takes is touching a door handle after a contagious person who hasn't washed their hands and then eating lunch, for example, these outbreaks could spiral into an even larger public health crisis.Hepatitis A had long been on the retreat. Thanks to a vaccine approved for use in the USA in 1995, there were just 1390 cases in 2015, the lowest rate in 40 years and down from 35 000 in 1989, according to the CDC. That means the current outbreaks stand out. From August 2016 to June 2017, Detroit had recorded 10 deaths and 190 cases of hepatitis A in the city and surrounding counties, 10 times the usual rate of infection [the latest statistics from 1 Aug 2016 to 15 Sep 2017 - total cases: 318, hospitalizations: 273 (85.8 percent), deaths: 14 (4.4 percent); Hepatitis A - USA (30): (MI) fatal Archive Number: 20170916.5321042 - Mod.LL]. Santa Cruz, California, recorded 69 cases as of 12 Sep 2017, when the city usually has just one or 2 cases a year [now 71, Hepatitis A - USA (28): (CA) fatal, RFI - Archive Number: 20170914.5313869 - Mod.LL]. As of May 2017, Colorado reported 26 hepatitis A cases, more than the state typically sees in a year [last reported with 54 cases and a death, Hepatitis A - USA (24): (CO) Archive Number: 20170831.5286610 - Mod.LL]. And the Salt Lake County Health Department reported about 20 cases [<http://kuer.org/post/hepatitis-increase-prompts-temporary-vaccination-clinics#stream/0> - Mod.LL], when it would normally see about 2 by this time of year.The CDC did not respond to requests for comment on the trend nationally. But the factors that contributed to the outbreak in San Diego are similar to those that could aggravate the problem in other cities: a dearth of affordable housing, problems with placing people in shelters -- either because there isn't space or rules keep them out -- and the lack of enough free, 24/7 bathrooms and showers.""We set up the environment for something like this to happen,"" said Michael McConnell, a San Diego resident and small-business owner who is an advocate for homeless residents.The San Diego outbreak is particularly troubling because most hepatitis A outbreaks are stopped by finding the source, such as a tainted food item, and eliminating it. But a common food source in San Diego hasn't been identified. And as people continue to come into contact with contaminated human feces, the disease continues to spread, meaning the crisis is far from over. Hepatitis A is also spread through sexual contact and sharing of needles. Dr. Wilma Wooten, director of public health services for San Diego County's Health and Human Services Agency, said the current hepatitis A outbreak is the largest public health challenge the county has seen in the 16 years that she has worked there. ""We certainly will see more cases and more deaths.""For most people, when they need to shower or use the toilet, there's a bathroom nearby that's clean, open and free. But that isn't always true for homeless people, especially those in San Diego, where many are forced to defecate outside, including in encampments.In 2015, San Diego had just 3 city restroom facilities open round the clock, the San Diego County grand jury that investigates government operations reported. San Francisco had 25. San Diego had spent more than a decade trying to solve the problem, but funding difficulties, lack of support from businesses and concerns that additional facilities would attract more homeless people downtown have stood in the way, the grand jury noted. Last week, as the crisis expanded, the city was making 14 public bathrooms accessible 24/7, and the mayor's office said the city is hoping to install more. City officials plan to open 3 new temporary tented shelters with restroom facilities and other services, they announced Wednesday. At least 30 hand-washing stations have also been installed around the city, with the option to add more.Jonathan Herrera, the San Diego mayor's senior adviser on homeless coordination, declined to comment on whether the lack of public facilities contributed to the hepatitis A outbreak. Homelessness in San Diego, and nationwide, stems in part from a lack of affordable housing. Californians have the highest poverty rates in the country, with one in 5 Californians unable to adequately support themselves or their families because of high housing costs. And the lack of affordable housing in San Diego has been exacerbated by the elimination of 10 000 ""affordable dwellings,"" or low-income units, since 2010.As of January 2017, there were 9116 people in San Diego County living on the streets or in shelters. An annual report earlier this year [2017] by the Regional Task Force on the Homeless said the number of tents and hand-built structures downtown had increased 104 percent from 2016. The city has a ""housing 1st"" initiative based on a national model to provide permanent housing for homeless people as quickly as possible. The San Diego Housing Commission has committed more than 3400 federal rental housing vouchers to address homelessness to date. But San Diego County still needs an additional 142 052 affordable residences, one nonprofit estimated.Providing affordable housing is a good deal for taxpayers. In Los Angeles, which has the nation's 2nd-largest homeless population, the average cost for providing a person supportive housing is about USD 605 a month, compared with USD 2897 in services needed for a person who is homeless, according to a 2009 study by the Economic Roundtable underwritten through the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority. But ""without enough housing available for those overcoming homelessness, a large number of people have nowhere to turn but the streets,"" said Deacon Jim Vargas, president and CEO of Father Joe's Villages, one of the shelters at the forefront of assisting the homeless population in San Diego.""We need to do a better job of preventing individuals from falling into homelessness in the 1st place,"" Herrera, the mayor's adviser, told HuffPost.San Diego has 1340 emergency shelter beds. But, according to the mayor's office, the rules that govern admission to those shelters make many homeless people reluctant to use them. Some don't want to be separated from a partner or pet, others don't want to abide by curfews that conflict with work hours or they don't want to leave possessions unattended on the street.""Many are sleeping in tents, have shopping carts, and their belongings, as meager as they are, they can't take them in with them,"" said Robert Moser, executive director of Catholic Charities for the Roman Catholic Diocese of San Diego. ""There's a reluctance to lose those things that they've latched on to as their safety net and possessions.""But Amy Gonyeau, chief operating officer for the Alpha Project, a nonprofit that serves the homeless in San Diego, argues that ""there is not sufficient shelter."" And while ""it is true that some people are service resistant,"" that is a ""minimal amount of the homeless population."" Nationwide, ""most communities do not actually have enough shelter beds,"" said Megan Hustings, the director of the National Coalition for the Homeless.Like other cities, San Diego has a number of laws that criminalize activities that homeless individuals can't always avoid, like sleeping in cars or camping in particular public places. Police often cite the homeless for encroachment. The city also regularly removes homeless individuals' possessions from the streets in a process called abatement that homeless people say amounts to harassment.In San Diego, people are ""being forced into smaller and smaller areas downtown,"" said Dr. Jeffrey Norris, who serves as medical director for St. Vincent de Paul Village, a nonprofit dedicated to ending the cycle of homelessness, based in downtown San Diego. ""It's a recipe for transmission of hepatitis A with such small quarters and people living on top of each other.""San Diego is fighting hard to contain the outbreak. So far, 21 000 people in the county have received the 1st of 2 vaccine shots, Wooten said. Vaccine drives, local public clinics, and teams of nurses and police officers sent out on foot to offer vaccinations in areas with concentrated homeless populations are working together to reach more people. But activists wish more had been done to prevent an outbreak in the 1st place. And the deaths are piling up. Norris said one of his longtime patients died suddenly of hepatitis A in June 2017. ""It was a wake-up call that this is killing people,"" Norris said. ""It's killing people we know. It's killing our neighbors."" ""We're not a 3rd world country,"" added McConnell, the community advocate. ""We should quit acting like we are.""[Byline: Dana Liebelson, Lauren Weber]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall<promed@promedmail.org>[The outbreaks of HAV in CA and MI both reflect the expanding economic gaps in the USA involving health care and housing, among others. We have not yet gotten to the degree of poor sanitation and lack of potable water that will feed outbreaks of cholera, but combining sanitary and health care gaps with flooding caused by poor urban development (such as became obvious in Houston, TX precipitated by hurricanes, we are moving along the slippery slope of more outbreaks of fecal/oral transmitted diseases such as caused by _Vibrio_ species such as _vulnificus_ and _cholerae_, _Salmonella_ subspecies including Typhi, multidrug resistant _Enterobacteriaceae_, and even hepatitis E. - Mod.LL]******[3] San Diego CountyDate: Mon 18 Sep 2017Source: San Diego Union-Tribune [edited]<http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/health/sd-me-hepatitis-origins-20170918-story.html>Even though the group of viruses that have killed 16 people in San Diego County have unique genetic signatures, experts are not holding out hope that they will be able to trace the region's hepatitis A outbreak to a single point of origin. That's because the 1st patient known to be part of the outbreak was a homeless person who was cared for in November 2016, about 4 months before it was clear to the county Health and Human Services Agency that an outbreak was underway.Dr. Eric McDonald, director of the county's Epidemiology and Immunization Services Branch, said that this individual had long ago been released and has not reappeared as the outbreak has intensified. Today, genetic testing performed by the CDC has identified 13 strains of the hepatitis A virus in samples collected from infected patients. ""This group is unique in the sense that, before it was sequenced in our outbreak, it had not been seen before,"" McDonald said. All, he added, are in the 1B genetic subtype that researchers have found most commonly circulates in the Mediterranean, South Africa and Turkey. In North America, Europe, China, Japan and Thailand a different subtype, 1A, dominates.But, while one type usually holds sway, less prevalent types are usually still present in communities even if they're not the most prevalent. said Dr. Stanley Lemon, a hepatitis researcher at the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill. While the unique strains detected in San Diego County may not have been genetically sequenced before, that does not mean that they haven't been around for quite a while. ""It could have been one that was circulating in Southern California at a very low rate for some time and just found a niche in this population,"" Lemon said.On Tue 19 Sep 2017, Mayor Kevin Faulconer and county public health officials will launch an education campaign about precautions for hepatitis. They plan to hold a news conference outside the bayside county building to urge at-risk individuals to get vaccinations, and list where they can get them, and inform the public about proper hand-washing.The hepatitis A virus has a remarkable ability to survive, so vaccinations and sanitation are key to turning the tide on the outbreak. It does not cause a chronic infection like hepatitis C does. Given enough time and support, the human immune system is almost always able to defeat hepatitis A.In order for the virus to survive, it needs to keep moving from person to person through what the medical community calls the ""fecal-oral route."" Because the virus is shed in human stool, it can end up in food or drink that another person consumes, allowing the microscopic pathogens to enter a new host. This chain has continued, Lemon noted, for quite a long time. ""Hepatitis A is very efficient at surviving in the environment. It has been doing so since humans 1st started living together in large groups,"" Lemon said.For most people, it's probably a little confusing to understand how patients in San Diego's outbreak could have been attacked by hepatitis A viruses considered to be unique yet still of the 1B type that has been well-known for decades. This, Lemon explained, has to do with the way genetics works. Those viruses with greater than 15 percent genetic variation are said to be of the same genotype. Those with between 7.5 percent and 15 percent variation are considered subtypes, and those with less than 7.5 difference are sometimes called strains. While all hepatitis A viruses labeled 1B are quite similar, that category still includes some variation and it is still possible to find specific genetic fingerprints within that group that haven't been seen before. Being able to see such fine-grained differences allows epidemiologists to get a sense of how an outbreak is moving through a community.In this case, genetic analysis has shown that the strains in this outbreak are unrelated to another ongoing outbreak in Southeastern Michigan and to previous multistate outbreaks connected to frozen strawberries and pomegranate seeds. But the same analysis has also proven that there is a connection to a much smaller recent outbreak in Santa Cruz County, which has 69 confirmed cases mostly among homeless residents and illicit drug users, much like in San Diego.McDonald said that, though the strains detected in Santa Cruz are similar, and it seems logical that the outbreak moved north after originating in San Diego County, interviews with those who have been infected have not turned up a specific person who migrated from one place to the other. ""We don't have a specific person that we know went from here to Santa Cruz,"" McDonald said.Using genetic finger printing to see how this outbreak has spread is an interesting exercise, he said, adding that he considers this kind of tracking academic. Though there is some genetic variation from strain to strain and type to type, that variation has not produced significant differences on the surface features of these viruses. It is proteins on the surfaces of virus cells that the human immune system uses to identify and attack foreign invaders, and a lack of differences means that there is just one vaccine for hepatitis A that works across subtypes.""Right now, we're in the middle of doing what we know works, and that's getting as many people vaccinated as we can because we know that the vaccine works no matter which type is involved,"" McDonald said.As vaccines go, the hepatitis the hepatitis A inoculation is known to be highly effective with a very low chance of side effects, according to Lemon, the North Carolina researcher. ""The hepatitis A vaccine is one of the best vaccines ever made,"" he said.[Byline: Paul Sisson]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Stan Lemon is an outstanding hepatitis researcher and a long-term colleague of mine.It is interesting that, as of the morning of 19 Sep 2017, CDC has not reported separately on either the CA or MI clusters (<https://www.cdc.gov/outbreaks/index.html>) but did update immunoglobulin dosing for postexposure HAV prophylaxis (see below). - Mod.LL]******[4] Los Angeles CountyDate: Mon 18 Sep 2017Source: KGTV [edited]<http://www.10news.com/news/health-officials-say-los-angeles-hepatitis-a-cases-tied-to-san-diego-outbreak>Los Angeles County health officials are scrambling to prevent the spread of hepatitis A after 3 people became infected with the potentially deadly virus while in San Diego 2 months ago. In a motion filed by Los Angeles County's Fifth District Supervisor Kathryn Barger, she is asking the Dept. of Public Health to provide a report within 14 days on current efforts to stop an outbreak and a plan for response should one occur.""At this time, Public Health does not consider there to be a hepatitis A outbreak in Los Angeles County, however it is important that the County proactively educate the community on ways to prevent hepatitis A infection, and have a response plan in the event that the County does see an increase in hepatitis A cases,"" Barger said in her prevention plan. Citing public health officials, Barger says that the 3 people who acquired the infection had been in San Diego in mid-July 2017.San Diego County health officials are in the midst of a hepatitis A epidemic. The virus is known to have sickened at least 421 people and killed 16 in San Diego County. The outbreak started with the homeless and drug using population, according to health officials. Now it has spread to the general population, with nearly 50 documented cases of people becoming sick, who have no ties to homeless or drug users, said the San Diego County Public Health Department.Last week, San Diego county health officials warned customers of a Pacific Beach restaurant that they may have been exposed to a person with hepatitis A on several specific dates and times. San Diego County health officials confirmed the patient worked at World Famous Restaurant while infected.Hepatitis A varies in severity, with mild cases lasting 2 weeks or less and in more severe cases lasting 4 to 7 weeks or longer. Some individuals, especially children, may not develop jaundice or any symptom at all. However, even mildly ill people can still be highly infectious and should consult a physician, according to County Public Health Officer Dr. Wilma Wooten. Someone with hepatitis can be contagious to others before they develop symptoms, according to the HHSA.[Byline: Mario Sevilla]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall<promed@promedmail.org>[It is not reported specifically that the LA cases are genetically linked to the SD cases but certainly are likely to be. A parallel outbreak in Los Angeles County is likely to be on a substantially larger scale. - Mod.LL]******[5] CDC recommendations for immunoglobulin prophylaxisDate: Fri 15 Sep 2017Source: MMWR 2017;66(36): 959-960 [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6636a5.htm>Updated Dosing Instructions for Immune Globulin (Human) GamaSTAN S/D for Hepatitis A Virus Prophylaxis----------------------------------------GamaSTAN S/D (Grifols Therapeutics, Inc., Research Triangle Park, North Carolina) is a sterile, preservative-free solution of immune globulin (IG) for intramuscular administration and is used for prophylaxis against disease caused by infection with hepatitis A, measles, varicella, and rubella viruses (1). GamaSTAN S/D is the only IG product approved by the FDA for hepatitis A virus (HAV) prophylaxis. In July 2017, GamaSTAN S/D prescribing information was updated with changes to the dosing instructions for hepatitis A preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis indications. These changes were made because of concerns about decreased HAV immunoglobulin G antibody (anti-HAV IgG) potency, likely resulting from decreasing prevalence of previous HAV infection among plasma donors, leading to declining anti-HAV antibody levels in donor plasma (2). No changes in dosing instructions were made for measles, varicella, or rubella preexposure or postexposure prophylaxis.Following are the updated recommended doses of GamaSTAN S/D for hepatitis A preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis (2).Preexposure Prophylaxis in Persons Who Plan to Travel in Areas with High or Intermediate Hepatitis A Endemicity-------------------------------------The recommended dosages of GamaSTAN S/D, which vary according to planned duration of travel are as follows:- Up to 1 month: 0.1 mL/kg- Up to 2 months: 0.2 mL/kg- 2 months or longer: repeat dose of 0.2 mL/kg every 2 months.Postexposure Prophylaxis of Household and Institutional Hepatitis A Case Contacts------------------------------------The recommended dosage of GamaSTAN S/D is 0.1 mL/kg. There is no maximum dosage of GamaSTAN S/D for hepatitis A prophylaxis (1).The effect of IG preparations on the response to certain live-virus vaccines is unknown, but antibodies in GamaSTAN S/D might interfere with live-virus vaccines such as measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine and varicella vaccine (1,3). The recommendations for the timing of administration of GamaSTAN S/D with live-virus vaccines has not changed (1,3). The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends that MMR and varicella vaccines should be administered at least 2 weeks before or at least 3 months after the administration of IG preparations (1). If an IG preparation must be administered less than 2 weeks after the administration of MMR or varicella vaccine, the patient should be revaccinated no sooner than 3 months after receipt of the IG preparation.The absolute lower limit of anti-HAV IgG required to prevent HAV infection has not been defined; however, 10 mIU/mL is considered to be the minimum protective level for HAV prophylaxis (1,4). The minimum anti-HAV IgG potency specified by the European Pharmacopoeia for intramuscular IG preparations indicated for HAV prophylaxis is over 100 IU/mL (5). A recent study showed that only 2 of 9 tested lots of commercially available IG preparations manufactured in the USA, Europe, and Asia had anti-HAV IgG potency of 100 IU/mL (6). In addition, anti-HAV IgG decay models indicate that only 5 of 9 lots of IG dosed at 0.02 mL/kg achieved postabsorption plasma anti-HAV IgG levels above the minimum protective level of 10 mIU/mL (6). The decay model also showed that none of the tested IG lots maintained the proposed minimal protective anti-HAV IgG level of 10 mIU/mL for 3 months (6).Indications for the use of IG are based on ACIP recommendations published in 2007 for prevention of hepatitis A infection after exposure to HAV and in international travelers (7).Preexposure Prophylaxis for International Travel:Hepatitis A vaccine at the age-appropriate dose is preferred to IG. For travel that will begin in 2 weeks or less to countries with high or intermediate hepatitis A endemicity, older adults, immunocompromised persons, and persons with chronic liver disease or other chronic medical conditions may receive IG simultaneously with hepatitis A vaccine at a separate anatomic injection site. Travelers who elect not to receive hepatitis A vaccine, who are aged under 12 months, or who are allergic to a component of hepatitis A vaccine should receive a single dose of IG before travel (7).Postexposure Prophylaxis:IG should be used for children aged under 12 months, immunocompromised persons, persons who have chronic liver disease, and persons for whom vaccine is contraindicated. IG is also preferred over hepatitis A vaccine for persons aged over 40 years; however, vaccine may be used if IG cannot be obtained (7).References-------1. GamaSTAN S/D. Package insert. Research Triangle Park, NC: Grifols; 2005. <https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/BloodBloodProducts/ApprovedProducts/LicensedProductsBLAs/FractionatedPlasmaProducts/UCM371376.pdf>.2. Important change in prescribing information immune globulin (human): GamaSTAN S/D <https://www.hypermunes.com/documents/24720443/24803488/Healthcare+Provider+Letter+GamaSTAN+SD+Revised+Dosage+July+7+2017_with+LIT+CODE.pdf/b831e517-9d0b-472c-b5b5-719f5bb5e47c>.3. Kroger AT, Duchin J, VÌÁzquez M: General best practice guidelines for immunization. Best practices guidance of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). <https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/index.html>.4. Fiore AE, Wasley A, Bell BP: Prevention of hepatitis A through active or passive immunization: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55(No. RR-7). PubMed.5. Council of Europe. European pharmacopoeia. 8th ed. Strasbourg, France: Council of Europe; 2015.6. Tejada-Strop A, Costafreda MI, Dimitrova Z, Kaplan GG, Teo CG: Evaluation of potencies of immune globulin products against hepatitis A. JAMA Intern Med 2017; 177: 430-432.7. CDC: Update: prevention of hepatitis A after exposure to hepatitis A virus and in international travelers. Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2007;56: 1080-1084.Table:Indications and updated dosage recommendations for GamaSTAN S/D human immune globulin for preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis against hepatitis A infection--------------------------------Indication / Updated dosage recommendationPreexposure prophylaxis------------------------------Up to 1 month of travel / 0.1 mL/kgUp to 2 months of travel / 0.2 mL/kg2 months of travel or longer / 0.2 mL/kg (repeat every 2 months)Postexposure prophylaxis / 0.1 mL/kg--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED HealthMap map for California, USA available at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>]
