Mundo Oriental [in Spanish, machine trans., edited]<http://www.mundo-oriental.com.ve/site/det.aspx?id=75552>The inhabitants of the Kashaama indigenous village, in Freites municipality [AnzoÌÁtegui state], are worried about the number of deaths recorded in recent weeks due to health problems. An inhabitant of this community, reported that during the month of August 2017 and so far in September 2017, 8 people -- 7 men and a woman -- have died in this community. An outbreak of diphtheria may be the leading cause of death for these 8 people. According to the complaint, among the dead are his uncle, who died about 15 days ago in the hospital of the city of El Tigre. He also made reference to another man, who died in the same care center and another man who died in Cantaura, Freites municipality.It was reported that all the deceased persons were diagnosed with acute asphyxia and respiratory arrest. The symptoms of the deceased were acute inflammation of the throat, dry cough, and fever. To date the residents of the community believe that it was diphtheria, but to date, no state health authority has confirmed or denied this suspicion.The source said that many people from this town have traveled to the mines of the state of BolÌ var seeking a better life for them and their families. The community is alarmed and demands that Saludanz [AnzoÌÁtegui Health Department] go to this population located in the Cantaura-El Tigre road, to carry out immunization days since these have not been carried out since December 2016.--Communicated by:ProMED-ESP<promed-esp@promedmail.org>[The following is extracted from <http://www.medindia.net/patients/patientinfo/diphtheria.htm>:""Diphtheria takes its name from the Greek word 'dipthera' meaning leather and was named in 1826 by French physician Pierre Bretonneau. This is because it refers to the leathery, sheath-like membrane that grows on the tonsils, throat, and in the nose. It was previously considered to be one of the most dreaded diseases, with frequent large-scale outbreaks in the New England colonies between 1735 and 1740. It was said that the disease killed as many as 80 per cent of the children below 10 years of age. Diphtheria is otherwise called the ""Strangling Angel of Children"" and was a dreaded common childhood illness. Statistics show that in the 1920s, there were an estimated 100 000 to 200 000 cases of diphtheria per year in the USA, with 13 000 to 15 000 deaths.""The following was extracted from <http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/downloads/dip.pdf>:""_C. diphtheriae_ is an aerobic Gram-positive bacillus. Toxin production (toxigenicity) occurs only when the bacillus is itself infected (lysogenized) by a specific virus (bacteriophage) carrying the genetic information for the toxin (tox gene). Only toxigenic strains can cause severe disease. Culture of the organism requires selective media containing tellurite. If isolated, the organism must be distinguished in the laboratory from other _Corynebacterium_ species that normally inhabit the nasopharynx and skin (such as diphtheroids). _C. diphtheriae_ has 4 biotypes: gravis, intermedius, mitis and belfanti. [The most severe disease is associated with the gravis biotype, but any strain may produce toxin.] All isolates of _C. diphtheriae_ should be tested by the laboratory for toxigenicity.""Susceptible persons may acquire toxigenic diphtheria bacilli in the nasopharynx. The organism produces a toxin that inhibits cellular protein synthesis and is responsible for local tissue destruction and membrane formation. The toxin produced at the site of the membrane is absorbed into the bloodstream and then distributed to the tissues of the body. The toxin is responsible for the major complications of myocarditis and neuritis and can also cause low platelet counts (thrombocytopenia) and protein in the urine (proteinuria). Clinical disease associated with non-toxin-producing strains is generally milder. While rare severe cases have been reported, these may actually have been caused by toxigenic strains that were not detected because of inadequate culture sampling.""The incubation period of diphtheria is 2-5 days (range, 1-10 days). Disease can involve almost any mucous membrane. For clinical purposes, it is convenient to classify diphtheria into a number of manifestations, depending on the site of disease. The most common sites of diphtheria infection are the pharynx and the tonsils. Infection at these sites is usually associated with substantial systemic absorption of toxin. The onset of pharyngitis is insidious. Early symptoms include malaise, sore throat, anorexia, and low-grade fever. Within 2-3 days, a bluish-white membrane forms and extends, varying in size from covering a small patch on the tonsils to covering most of the soft palate. Often by the time a physician is contacted, the membrane is greyish-green, or black if bleeding has occurred. There is a minimal amount of mucosal erythema surrounding the membrane. The membrane is adherent to the tissue, and forcible attempts to remove it cause bleeding. Extensive membrane formation may result in respiratory obstruction.""The patient may recover at this point; or if enough toxin is absorbed, develop severe prostration, striking pallor, rapid pulse, stupor, and coma, and may even die within 6 to 10 days. Fever is usually not high, even though the patient may appear quite toxic. Patients with severe disease may develop marked edema of the submandibular areas and the anterior neck along with lymphadenopathy, giving a characteristic ""bull neck"" appearance.""Most complications of diphtheria, including death, are attributable to effects of the toxin. The severity of the disease and complications are generally related to the extent of local disease. The toxin, when absorbed, affects organs and tissues distant from the site of invasion. The most frequent complications of diphtheria are myocarditis and neuritis. Myocarditis may present as abnormal cardiac rhythms and can occur early in the course of the illness or weeks later, and can lead to heart failure. If myocarditis occurs early, it is often fatal. Neuritis most often affects motor nerves and usually resolves completely. Paralysis of the soft palate is most frequent during the 3rd week of illness. Paralysis of eye muscles, limbs, and diaphragm can occur after the 5th week. Secondary pneumonia and respiratory failure may result from diaphragmatic paralysis. Other complications include otitis media and respiratory insufficiency due to airway obstruction, especially in infants.""Maps of Venezuela can be seen at <http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/americas/venezuela.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/14689>. The Pedro MarÌ a Freites municipality is one of the 21 municipalities (municipios) that makes up the eastern Venezuelan state of AnzoÌÁtegui and can be found on a map at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedro_Mar%C3%ADa_Freites_Municipality>. - Mod.LL]
