Daiji World [edited]<http://www.daijiworld.com/news/newsDisplay.aspx?newsID=472394>A team of experts from India and Sweden has flagged concerns over uncontrolled dumping of partly treated/untreated urban waste into rivers -- leading to the spread of antibiotic resistance. Drawing attention to pollution of water courses from domestic waste, they found that antibiotic resistance genes were significantly more abundant in river sediments collected from the city than from upstream sites.""The growing resistance amongst bacterial pathogens limits our ability to treat infections. Environment plays an important role in transmission of bacterial pathogens and bacteria carrying antibiotic resistance genes (ARG),"" Nachiket P. Marathe at the Centre for Antibiotic Resistance Research at the University of Gothenburg, Sweden, told IANS via email.""Hospital environments have been extensively studied in this perspective, but there is limited data on risks posed by external environments, like rivers, on transmission of antibiotic resistance gene carrying bacteria,"" Marathe said about the study published in Water Research in July [2017] [1].Marathe and his colleagues from the University of Gothenburg, Sweden, Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden and Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune, examined the effect of domestic waste pollution on river microflora. Chandan Pal, Swapnil S.Gaikwad, Viktor Jonsson, Erik Kristiansson and Joakim Larsson are the study co-authors.Sediment samples were collected along Mutha river flowing through Pune in India - at upstream sites as well as locations within the city. To get a better understanding of total bacteria and resistance genes present in the samples, DNA sequencing method (shotgun metagenomics) was applied.Overall total antibiotic resistance genes were ""30 times more abundant in river sediments from the city compared to upstream sites."" This implies that domestic wastes pollution is enriching the river with bacteria carrying antibiotic resistance genes and river sediments from within the city contain antibiotic resistance genes, which can be transferred between bacterial species.What is more worrying is that some of the bacterial antibiotic-resistance genes detected in the study defend them against last resort drugs (the last choice for treatment), for example, carbapenems.India, in its National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance (NAP-AMR) 2017 - 2021, says the emergence of resistance is not only limited to the older and more frequently used classes of drugs, but there has also been a rapid increase in resistance to the newer and more expensive drugs, like carbapenems. Carbapenems are broad spectrum antibiotics and regarded as the ""go-to"" drugs for serious infections, especially when multi-drug resistant organisms are a concern. The samples showed the presence of all the clinically important carbapenemases-enzymes found in pathogenic bacteria that degrade carbapenems. These enzymes help in conferring resistance against the drug.""Carbapenems are used for treatment when penicillins (eg. amoxicillin, ampicillin) and cephalosporins (eg. cefepime, cefadroxil) don't work. Resistance against carbapenems leaves very few drugs for treating these bacterial infections. Hence, finding these genes in the environment is a big concern,"" cautioned Marathe. Aside from this, the sediments also feature the multi-drug resistance bacterial genus _Acinetobacter_.According to Joakim Larsson, senior author of the study, professor and director of the Centre for Antibiotic Resistance Research in Gothenburg, the observance in the Pune river is probably not an exception, but it is ""likely a rather common situation"" in India.""Without very large investments in sewage infrastructure, Indian rivers will unfortunately remain transmission routes for infectious diseases, and an important reservoir of multi-resistant bacteria. This, in turn, infers increase in morbidity and associated costs to society. Current initiatives to clean up Indian rivers are good, but probably need even more momentum,"" Larsson told IANS.Marathe contends that in addition to efficient sewage treatment options, one needs to factor in the population as well. ""In cities especially, we produce more waste than the capacity for sewage treatment and hence the pollution,"" he said.Outlining the route of transmission, Marathe points to the vicious cycle. ""The river water is used by the villages downstream of the city as drinking water (with some preliminary treatment) and also for irrigation. Domestic animals and sometimes humans are swimming in the river.""During monsoon floods, the river water enters the streets and houses (in some cases). This would facilitate transmission of these bacteria carrying antibiotic resistance genes (including pathogens) back to humans. This might eventually lead to increase in infections with antibiotic resistant bacteria,"" he added.[Byline: Sahana Ghosh][1. Marathe NP, Pal C, Gaikwad SS, Jonsson V, Kristiansson E and Larsson DGJ. Untreated urban waste contaminates Indian river sediments with resistance genes to last resort antibiotics. Water Res. 2017 Jul 25;124:388-397. doi:10.1016/j.watres.2017.07.060. (Epub ahead of print). Abstract available at: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28780361>.]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The following is the abstract of the article referenced in the news report above:Abstract--------""Efficient sewage treatment is critical for limiting environmental transmission of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. In many low- and middle-income countries, however, large proportions of sewage are still released untreated into receiving water bodies. In-depth knowledge of how such discharges of untreated urban waste influences the environmental resistome is largely lacking. Here, we highlight the impact of uncontrolled discharge of partially treated and/or untreated wastewater on the structure of bacterial communities and resistome of sediments collected from Mutha river flowing through Pune city in India. Using shotgun metagenomics, we found a wide array (n equal 175) of horizontally transferable antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) including carbapenemases such as NDM, VIM, KPC, OXA-48 and IMP types. The relative abundance of total ARGs was 30-fold higher in river sediments within the city compared to upstream sites. A total of 44 ARGs, including the tet(X) gene conferring resistance to tigecycline, OXA-58 and GES type carbapenemases, were significantly more abundant in city sediments, while 2 ARGs were more common at upstream sites. The recently identified mobile colistin resistance gene mcr-1 was detected only in one of the upstream samples, but not in city samples. In addition to ARGs, higher abundances of various mobile genetic elements were found in city samples, including integron-associated integrases and ISCR transposases, as well as some biocide/metal resistance genes. Virulence toxin genes as well as bacterial genera comprising many pathogens were more abundant here; the genus _Acinetobacter_, which is often associated with multidrug resistance and nosocomial infections, comprised up to 29 percent of the 16S rRNA reads, which to our best knowledge is unmatched in any other deeply sequenced metagenome. There was a strong correlation between the abundance of _Acinetobacter_ and the OXA-58 carbapenemase gene. Our study shows that uncontrolled discharge of untreated urban waste can contribute to an overall increase of the abundance and diversity of ARGs in the environment, including those conferring resistance to last-resort antibiotics.""Pune is the 2nd largest city in the Indian state of Maharashtra (Mumbai, being the largest city in Maharashtra) and the 7th most populous city in the country; Pune is located along the Mutha River (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pune>). Pune is home to several educational institutions that accommodate nearly half of the total international students in India, manufacturing and automobile industries, vaccine production facilities, several medical schools and multiple hospitals (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_hospitals_in_Pune>). We are not told if the portions of the Mutha River that were sampled in the study drained untreated sewage from residential districts, hospitals, medical research institutes, vaccine manufacturing facilities or some combination of these sites.Prior ProMED-mail posts have reported on the high rates of antimicrobial resistance in both human populations and in the environment in India (see ProMED-mail posts Antibiotic resistance (04): India, China, environmental pollution 20161020.4574059, Antibiotic resistance (03): India (TG) environmental pollution 20161010.4548738, and Antibiotic resistance - India: (Delhi) E. coli, MDR, river water pollution 20151209.3850743). The dumping of untreated or inadequately treated waste from antibiotic pharmaceutical facilities in India, where a large portion of our drugs are manufactured; from hospitals; from farmland, and from residential areas, all contribute to the antibiotic and antibiotic-resistant microbial contamination of the environment. In India antibiotics are over-prescribed and may also be bought directly by the populace over-the-counter without prescription. In 2010, India was the world's largest consumer of antibiotics for human health (<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1001974>). People who consume antibiotics can then shed antibiotics as well as antibiotic resistant microbes in urine and stool that may eventually end up in the environment when untreated or inadequately treated human sewage is dumped into waterways. This can expose people and animals to antibiotic resistant bacteria and genes that encode antibiotic resistance and create the potential for genes conferring resistance to spread to other bacteria in environmental habitats. - Mod.ML]
