Los Angeles Times [edited]<http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-ln-hepatitis-la-20170919-story.html>Los Angeles [LA] County health officials declared a hepatitis A outbreak [Tue 19 Sep 2017], days after a public health emergency was announced in San Diego County, where at least 16 people have died of the highly contagious virus. Case numbers are still small in LA County, with only 10 people infected as part of the outbreak, said Dr Barbara Ferrer, director of the LA County Department of Public Health. By comparison, almost 450 people have contracted the virus in San Diego. Ferrer said the department is ramping up prevention efforts locally so more people don't get sick. San Diego's outbreak has already spread to Santa Cruz, where 69 people have been diagnosed.Officials say homeless people in California are most at risk, because the virus appears to be moving from person to person within that community. People become infected with hepatitis A, which affects the liver, by ingesting the feces of someone who's infected, often through contaminated food or sexual contact. San Diego's outbreak appears to be fueled by poor sanitary conditions, with many cases among people who used shared restrooms in jails or shelters.Ferrer said LA health workers will inspect homeless encampments in Los Angeles to improve sanitation, while spreading the word about improved hygiene. The city of Los Angeles is already cleaning the streets on skid row with bleach, a practice San Diego adopted earlier this month [September 2017] in an effort to reduce disease transmission. She also said they're aiming to distribute 40 000 vaccinations of hepatitis A to homeless people in LA County. They're also providing shots to new jail inmates, active drug users, and medical providers.""We are very early in an outbreak and the more people who get vaccinated in the high-risk populations ... the smaller the outbreak will end up being in LA County,"" Ferrer said. ""This is in fact a disease that's preventable."" The efforts will continue for months, she said, as San Diego officials expect their outbreak to persist into 2018.Los Angeles County health officials said that before this week, they had already counted 8 patients infected with hepatitis A. 5 had recently traveled to San Diego or Santa Cruz, where they were probably exposed, officials said. 3 other people were infected at a healthcare facility where 1 of those 5 was being treated. But [Tue 19 Sep 2017], officials said they had diagnosed 2 people who appear to have been infected locally, triggering the outbreak declaration. The 2 new cases involved homeless people who had not traveled to a place with an outbreak, Ferrer said.""The outbreak label isn't meant to scare people,"" said County Supervisor Sheila Kuehl at Tuesday's [19 Sep 2017] county supervisors meeting. ""It isn't suddenly that we're rife with hepatitis A cases here.""Dr Sharon Balter, LA County public health department's director of acute communicable disease control, said an outbreak of hepatitis A is the homeless community is especially concerning because many have underlying health conditions.Most people recover from hepatitis A on their own, but it can be seriously harmful for people with other liver conditions, including hepatitis B or C. Approximately 4 percent of infected patients in San Diego have died, a significantly higher proportion than the typical 1 percent mortality rate for the disease, she said. ""This particular population is particularly vulnerable,"" Balter said.Though the current outbreak is centered in the homeless community, anyone can contract hepatitis A. Each year in LA County there are 40 to 60 people infected by the virus, which is often transmitted through contaminated food. One of the 10 people in LA County infected in the ongoing outbreak worked at a fruit stand in Lancaster and may have passed on the virus. The only outbreak in the past 20 years in the USA bigger than San Diego's was caused by green onions served at a Pennsylvania restaurant that sickened more than 900 people.[Byline: Soumya Karlamangla]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Yesterday's (18 Sep 2017) report noted only 3 cases and now the number in LA county is up to 10. 5 of the cases were imported from outbreaks in San Diego and Santa Cruz. This report notes that 2 seem to be in homeless individuals without travel outside LA county and the 3 others were infected in a health care setting, the circumstances of which are unclear. A much more populous county, HAV spreading in Los Angeles county could contribute substantially to the state's HAV infection count. - Mod.LLThe state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>. A county map can be seen at <http://geology.com/county-map/california-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
