Scientific Reports [edited]<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-10901-1>Ref: George J, Valiant WG, Mattapallil MJ, et al. Prior exposure to Zika virus significantly enhances peak dengue-2 viremia in rhesus macaques. Sci Rep. 2017; 7(1): 10498. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-10901-1----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------Structural and functional homologies between the Zika and dengue viruses' envelope proteins raise the possibility that cross-reactive antibodies induced following Zika virus infection might enhance subsequent dengue infection. Using the rhesus macaque model we show that prior infection with Zika virus leads to a significant enhancement of dengue-2 viremia that is accompanied by neutropenia, lymphocytosis, hyperglycemia, and higher reticulocyte counts, along with the activation of pro-inflammatory monocyte subsets and release of inflammatory mediators. Zika virus infection induced detectable dengue cross-reactive serum IgG responses that significantly amplified after dengue-2 virus infection. Serum from Zika virus immune animals collected prior to dengue-2 infection showed significant capacity for in vitro antibody dependent enhancement [ADE] of dengue-1, 2, 3, and 4 serotypes suggesting that pre-existing immunity to Zika virus could potentially enhance infection by heterologous dengue serotypes. Our results provide 1st in vivo evidence that prior exposure to Zika virus infection can enhance dengue [virus] infection, which has implications for understanding pathogenesis and the development of vaccines.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There has been some debate about the possibility of Zika virus antibody-related enhancement of dengue virus infection or visa versa. There is some previous evidence in a monkey model that there were no significant differences between flavivirus-naÌøve and primed (yellow fever and dengue) animals observed in viral titers or biofluid distribution, neutralizing antibody levels, or immune cell kinetics following ZIKV infection. There was no alteration of viral titers in peripheral blood, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, saliva, or vaginal secretions, as well as alterations in gross pathology, clinical parameters, or immune response, as compared to the flavivirus-naÌøve cohort (see Zika virus (16): Americas, Asia, research, observations 20170819.5261363). The report above examined the reverse situation and indicates that ADE can occur when dengue viruses infect Zika virus immune individuals.Although there have been very few reports of dengue cases in the popular press this past week, the PAHO/WHO summary indicates that transmission continues in the Americas. Transmission in the Southern Cone of South America usually slows during the current cool weather season and is expected to increase with onset of warm, summer weather. - Mod.TY]
