MMWR 2017;66: 999-1000<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6637a7.htm?s_cid=mm6637a7_w>Increase in Reported Hepatitis A Infections Among MSM -- NYC, January-August 2017---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Since 2011, the New York City (NYC) Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) has typically been notified of 3 or fewer cases of hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection each year among men who have sex with men (MSM) who reported no travel to countries where HAV is endemic. In 2017, DOHMH noted an increase in HAV infections among MSM with onsets in January-March 2017, and notified other public health jurisdictions via Epi-X, CDC's communication exchange network. As a result, 51 patients with HAV infection involving MSM were linked to the increase in NYC.Confirmed cases were defined as symptomatic HAV infections with onset after 31 December 2016, in NYC residents who reported being MSM or having sexual contact with MSM, and reported no travel to areas of high or intermediate HAV endemicity. Probable cases were defined as onset of symptomatic HAV infection after 31 December 2016, in NYC residents who, irrespective of travel, reported being MSM or having sexual contact with MSM. For the period 1 Jan 2017 - 31 Aug 2017, DOHMH identified 46 cases in MSM or persons with sexual contact with MSM; 36 confirmed and 9 probable cases occurred in 45 MSM patients and one was in a female (confirmed case) who reported sexual contact with a bisexual male resident of a New York county outside New York City. A total of 15 (33 percent) of the 46 patients were hospitalized, and 3 (7 percent) reported previous receipt of hepatitis A vaccine. 19 (41 percent) patients had traveled domestically during their incubation period, and 8 (17 percent) had traveled to Western European countries where outbreaks of HAV infection among MSM are ongoing (1).NYC routine surveillance identified another case of HAV infection (in addition to the 46 NYC patients), in a man who was hospitalized in New York City but resided in the New York county that had been visited by the female patient. Several Colorado jurisdictions also contacted DOHMH to report increases in HAV infections among MSM. In total, 51 patients were linked to the increase in NYC, either through epidemiologic or laboratory evidence, including 5 non-NYC patients (3 from Colorado, one from New York outside of NYC, and one from Oregon).Up to 3 of the 46 NYC patients and the one patient from Oregon reported sexual contact with 4 NYC outbreak patients (Figure [for Figure, see original URL - Mod.LL]. The Oregon patient (illness onset March 2017) worked as a food handler at a restaurant in Oregon, and a 2nd food handler in the establishment subsequently contracted HAV infection, prompting a public notification recommending postexposure prophylaxis for an estimated 1000 patrons who ate or drank at the establishment during a 7-day period in March 2017.Serum specimens from 25 NYC MSM patients, the NYC female patient, and the New York (non-NYC) MSM patient were sent to CDC's Division of Viral Hepatitis Laboratory for molecular sequencing. Sequences of HAV isolated from the serum of 24 patients, including 4 of the 8 who had traveled to Europe, matched the strains of genotype IA HAV circulating among European MSM: HAV16-090 (14 patients), VRD_521_2016 (8), V16-25801 (2); 2 patients had sequences matching 3 Colorado MSM patients, and one had a unique sequence (Figure).Only 3 patients with HAV infection reported previous receipt of HAV vaccine; this ongoing investigation highlights the importance of HAV vaccination among MSM, and of determining MSM status during HAV investigations. One patient received one dose (as postexposure prophylaxis), but the doses for the other 2 patients were unknown; both reported previous receipt of HAV vaccine but did not know the number of doses. Since 1996, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices has recommended that all MSM receive 2 doses of HAV vaccine administered at least 6 months apart (2). In NYC, the incidence of HAV infection for 2013-2015 was 6.8 times higher among MSM adults who had not traveled to countries where HAV is endemic than among non-MSM adults. HAV vaccine was added to the routine childhood immunization schedule in 2006, but many susceptible adults might still be unvaccinated. Efforts to promote HAV vaccine in MSM, including targeted messaging campaigns, will help prevent transmission among MSM (2).References----------1. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Rapid risk assessment: hepatitis A outbreak in the EU/EEA mostly affecting men who have sex with men. 3d update, June 28, 2017. Solna, Sweden: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control; 2017. <https://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/rapid-risk-assessment-hepatitis-outbreak-eueea-mostly-affecting-men-who-have-sex>2. CDC. Prevention of hepatitis A through active or passive immunization: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 1996;45(No. RR-15).[Authors: Foster M, Burakoff A, Brown K, et al]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This upswing of HAV cases on NYC seems to parallel the upswing in Europe and parts of Asia as being primarily related to MSMs rather than related to the homeless cohort as occurring currently in California and Michigan.Because of specific sexual practices, men who have sex with men (MSM) are known to have a higher risk of acquiring hepatitis A and, if not vaccinated in childhood, should be immunized if found to be anti-HAV negative.The recommendations for HAV vaccination in susceptible adults from the United States' Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP] are to vaccinate any person seeking protection from hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection and people with any of the following indications: - men who have sex with men; - people who use injection or non-injection illicit drugs; - people working with HAV-infected primates or with HAV in a research laboratory setting; - people with chronic liver disease and people who receive clotting factor concentrates; - people traveling to or working in countries that have high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A; and - unvaccinated people who anticipate close personal contact (such as household or regular babysitting) with an international adoptee during the 1st 60 days after arrival in the United States from a country with high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A. The 1st dose of the 2-dose hepatitis A vaccine series should be administered as soon as adoption is planned, ideally 2 or more weeks before the arrival of the adoptee.The HAV vaccination history of the cases is not stated. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/252>.]
