WTop [edited]<http://wtop.com/charles- county/2017/09/swine-flu-5- pigs-charles-co-fair-leads- quarantine/>Maryland authorities are investigating 5 cases of swine flu in pigs that were recently exhibited at the Charles County Fair. Seven Maryland residents have contracted a strain of swine flu from infected pigs at the Charles County fair.The infected people had close contact with the 5 pigs recently exhibited at the Charles County Fair that tested positive for swine flu, the Maryland Department of Health said Wednesday [20 Sep 2017]. None of the infected individuals has developed serious illness or been hospitalized.The pig infection, announced earlier Wednesday [20 Sep 2017], led to a quarantine of all pigs at the fairgrounds and the cancellation of swine exhibits at 2 upcoming fairs in neighboring counties.Transmission of swine flu, officially known as influenza A, to humans is rare but possible, the health department said. The Charles County Fair, which ran from 14-17 Sep 2017, took place at the Charles County fairgrounds in La Plata, Maryland.All pigs exhibited there are now under a quarantine order and will not be released until 7 days after the last pig shows signs of illness. As a further step, Maryland Secretary of Agriculture Joseph Bartenfelder issued an order Tuesday [19 Sep 2017] canceling swine exhibits at the upcoming St. Mary's and Calvert County fairs.The health department said swine flu infections in humans can occur in people who have handled sick pigs, such as children handling pigs at agricultural fairs and workers in the swine industry. It is not yet clear the capacity in which the infected people came in contact with the pigs.Since 2005, there have been about 400 cases of swine flu reported in humans, ""which means that it's really unusual,"" said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health in a phone interview with WTOP.""This is a phenomenon that occurs infrequently,"" he added. ""It has not led to significant public health problems, but you want to keep your eye out on it as you always do when you have these unusual infections.""The symptoms of swine flu are similar to the seasonal flu, including fever, cough and sore throat.The health department advised people who come down with flu-like symptoms and who had contact with pigs in the last 7 days to contact their healthcare providers. The local health department should be contacted if swine flu is suspected.The Charles County Health Department can be reached at 301-609-6900 ext. 6025, and the St. Mary's County Health Department can be reached at 301-475-4330. To report sick pigs, you can reach the state agriculture department at 410-841-5810 or after hours at 410-841-5971.[Byline: Jack Moore, Sarah Beth Hensley]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The total number of influenza A/H3N2v cases reported in 2017 is 18 to date [Fri 22 Sep 2017] (according to the latest update on the CDC webpage <https://www.cdc.gov/flu/swineflu/h3n2v-case-count.htm>] with 2 hospitalizations. This does not include the 7 cases mentioned in the above report, which will increase the total to 25 cases this year [2017]. Prior to this event, 12 H3N2v cases were reported from Maryland in 2012, and up till now, there have been no other reports. - Mod.UBA][Clinical characteristics of the A/H3N2v cases are generally consistent with those of seasonal influenza including fever, cough, pharyngitis, myalgia, and headache. Most fairs and exhibits do not test the animals entering the exhibition. If the swine were carrying the virus and stressed by new surroundings, the caretakers/family may have had close contact and been exposed, catching the virus. Testing all the animals for such an exhibition would be costly and time consuming.Swine influenza, more commonly called swine flu, is a respiratory disease of pigs caused by type A influenza virus. This particular strain of the virus has caused some outbreaks in pigs on a rather regular basis. Swine flu viruses can cause high levels of illness in pig herds, but usually it only causes a few deaths in pigs. Swine influenza viruses can circulate among swine throughout the year, but most outbreaks occur during the late fall and winter months, similar to outbreaks in humans.  Swine flu viruses do not usually infect humans, but H3N2 and certain other strains can cause zoonotic infections in humans.  The 2009 H1N1 epidemic was unfortunately mislabeled as ""swine flu"" by the popular media, causing undue negative effects on the swine industry.Oftentimes, owners of animals will kiss their animals for photos, or affection, and this may be a way of spreading the disease. Furthermore, hand washing is exceptionally important and can be overlooked among hurried caretakers. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/223>.]
