The News [edited]<https://www.thenews.com.pk/ print/230853-Congo-fever- kills-first-Karachi-resident- this-year>A 30-year-old man who died of the deadly Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever at a private hospital a day ago became the 1st citizen of Karachi to have been killed by the virus this year [2017], provincial health authorities said on Monday [18 Sep 2017].A resident of Adam Town in Phase I, DHA, the victim, NK, was brought to a private hospital in Clifton on Thursday [14 Sep 2017?], said Dr Zafar Mehdi, Sindh health department's focal person for the viral disease's committee.Initially admitted to the Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre, NK was shifted to the private hospital by his family since they were dissatisfied with the treatment being provided at JMPC, the victim's younger brother told The News.NK remained under treatment at South City Hospital for 3 days, but, unfortunately, could not survive the lethal disease. His brother had bought sacrificial animals for Eidul Azha from Balochistan's Hub Tehsil. Soon after the trip, NK developed a high fever and complained of a severe headache. ""When his condition worsened, we took him to the JPMC and then shifted him to the South City Hospital where he died on Sunday [17 Sep 2017].""With NK's death, the total number of Congo fever deaths reported in the city so far this year [2017] has reached 5. Since April 2017, a total of 4 people, all from Quetta, have died of the virus at different private hospitals in Karachi.One patient, however, currently remains under treatment at the JPMC. 18-year-old ZA, also from Quetta, was admitted to the medical facility's ICU last week, and his condition is said to be improving with each passing day.""ZA was brought to the JPMC with symptoms of the virus, after which we immediately started his treatment. But now, his condition is improving, and he will be discharged from the hospital as soon as he is out of danger,"" JPMC Executive Director Dr Seemin Jamali shared with The News.She also confirmed NK's admittance to the JPMC, stating that he was shifted by his family against the medical advice of JPMC's doctors. Dr Seemin said that this year [2017], the hospital received 2 Congo patients.On 13 Sep 2017, the health authorities reported the death of 35-year-old AK, while PG, 60, died on 13 Aug 2017; 25-year-old NM and 15-year-old SK died on 13 May and 9 Apr 2017, respectively. All were residents of Quetta's Satellite Town.As many as 47 patients suffering from CCHF were brought to various public and private hospitals of the city; however, 42 of them recovered successfully, the health department officer claimed. At least 45 of these patients were residents of Quetta's Satellite Town, Dr Mehdi said, adding, that most of the patients were taken to the city's private hospitals. He suspected that Satellite Town was under the grip of the deadly virus' outbreak.Dr Mehdi said a team of health department officials would visit NK's house soon to draw blood samples of his family to ascertain whether any of them had contracted the virus.""I along with director health Karachi Dr Taufiq did all that was possible to keep the city's residents safe from the deadly Congo virus, and we largely remained successful,"" Dr Mehdi claimed.""This death is also linked with Balochistan, as the deceased had brought his sacrificial animals from the province.""As per medical experts, the infectious disease is highly contagious and is caused by a tick. The disease has a mortality rate of 40 percent and often infects people who deal in livestock and cattle.[Byline: M. Waqar Bhatti]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[CCHF is a disease endemic to Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Iran as well as central Asian states; cattle and personnel movement between the 1st 3 countries has led to the importation of vectors as well as cases <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25959153>.As animals with CCHF viremia do not exhibit clinical disease or morbidity, the control measures would principally include vector mapping by geographical regions and measures for vector control and increasing awareness among the high-risk groups. The exposure to infected animals during the Eid-Ul-Azha season in this case highlights the need for coordinated, routine surveillance in animals as well as humans for this important zoonosis. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/707>.]
