Australian Broadcasting Corporation [edited]<http://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2017-09-11/q-fever-spreads-outer-urban-areas-north-queensland/8891762>The rate of Q fever cases is now highest in outer urban areas of north Queensland, and it is believed many patients have caught the disease from mowing the lawn.Until now, the potentially fatal bacterial infection has only been associated with the cattle industry. But people living on small acreages in the Townsville and Mackay regions are now the group most at risk of contracting the disease in Queensland.Townsville Hospital director of microbiology Robert Norton began investigating the issue a few years ago when he noticed most patients being treated for Q fever tended to live on lifestyle blocks. It is suspected the disease is being transmitted by native animals.""Wallabies in particular will come down to feed on the new grass. They'll leave their droppings, and when the area is mowed, these droppings are aerosolized, and the person doing the mowing breathes them in,"" Professor Norton said. ""We've done some surveys of a variety of animals, and we found that between 30 and 40 per cent of the wallabies surveyed tested positive for Q fever, and this compares with about 15 to 20 per cent of cattle."" Bandicoots and possums were also found to be carriers, along with suburban dogs.The Q fever rate among humans in Australia is between 1 and 2 people for every 100 000, and in Queensland, it affects 3 per 100 000. However, Professor Norton said statistics from hospital records showed that in the Townsville region, the Q fever rate was 6 in every 100 000 people, and in specific suburbs, it affected 30 per 100 000. In one Mackay area, the rate is 50 in 100 000 people.""These are people who have been ill enough to need hospital admission or a hospital review,"" Professor Norton said. ""About 20 to 30 per cent of people who are infected will require hospital admission, and in less than 5 per cent of people, it can be quite severe and has led to death.""Pregnant women, or women planning to become pregnant, are particularly in danger. ""Pregnant women are at risk of having a stillbirth or a miscarriage if they get Q fever, and this has occurred in the regions mentioned,"" Professor Norton said.Rural Doctors Association Queensland president Konrad Kangru, who is also a GP in Proserpine, one of the affected areas, said people living on small acreages in dry areas of north Queensland should be alert but not alarmed. ""Just like with cyclones and irukandji [a highly venomous box jellyfish - CopyEd.MSP] and everything else, living up in these areas does have its risks, and certainly, the _Coxiella burnetii_ bacteria in the soil are one that we have to watch out for,"" he said.People who are involved in soil work are urged to talk to their GP about being vaccinated. ""What we're seeing is you've got a lot of land which has previously been grazing properties or cane farms that are now being resumed for residential development,"" Dr Kangru said. ""Anybody who is involved in earthworks, anybody who's involved in setting up those new developments and construction, they need to be thinking about what sort of inhalational soil exposure they might have.""Dr Kangru said patients often did not realise they had had the disease, because of its influenza-like symptoms. ""Very often, we'll actually do a blood test for Q fever, and it'll show that somebody's had a previous exposure to the illness even though they haven't been acutely unwell with it,"" he said.People who have been exposed in the past have to be tested for any adverse reactions before having a Qvax inoculation, because it can cause extreme side effects in those who have already had the disease. For this reason, Anthony Gregory, a post-doctoral research fellow at Texas A&M University, is working on developing an alternative vaccine through funding from the US military. ""In a recent study in 2012, of 1000 US troops who were deployed to Iraq, 10 per cent of them were seropositive to Q fever,"" he said. ""Because of the reactogenicity associated with Qvax in hyper-sensitised individuals, it meant that 10 per cent of this population were not eligible for the vaccine.""The United States also wants a new vaccine to prepare for _Coxiella burnetii_ possibly being used as a bio-threat. ""It's categorized as a CDC tier 2 select agent as a bio-weapon,"" Dr Gregory said. ""It has previously been developed, I believe by the Soviets during World War II."" Initial trials of the alternative vaccine on mice and guinea pigs have shown promise, but human trials are not expected for several years.[Byline: Ren̩e Cluff]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Q fever, often acquired by close exposure to animals, is infectious with a very low inoculum and may be aerosolized over a significant distance. _Coxiella burnetii_, the causative agent, was discovered in 1937. This organism is an agent that can be resistant to heat and desiccation and is highly infectious by the aerosol route. A single inhaled organism may produce clinical illness. Indeed, in [non-human] primates, the dose to kill 50 percent of primates was found to be 1.7 organisms.Cattle, sheep, and goats are the primary reservoirs of _C. burnetii_. Infection has been noted in a wide variety of other animals, including other species of wildlife, livestock, and in domesticated pets. _C. burnetii_ does not usually cause clinical disease in these animals, although abortion in goats and sheep has been linked to _C. burnetii_ infection. Organisms are excreted in milk, urine, and feces of infected animals. Most importantly, during birthing, the organisms are shed in high numbers within the amniotic fluids and the placenta. Contact with contaminated wool is known to be a mode of transmission.The organisms can be resistant to heat, drying, and many common disinfectants. These features enable the bacteria to survive for long periods in the environment. This very stable form of _C. burnetii_ is associated with compact small cell variants of the organism that are produced during standard replication along with the less resistant large cell form, metabolically dormant and spore-like.Infection of humans usually occurs by inhalation of these organisms from air that contains airborne barnyard dust contaminated by dried placental material, birth fluids, and excreta of infected herd animals. Humans are often very susceptible to the disease, and very few organisms may be required to cause infection.Ingestion of contaminated milk, followed by regurgitation and inspiration of the contaminated food, is a less common mode of transmission. Other modes of transmission to humans, including tick bites and human-to-human transmission, are rare. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/285>.]
