Food Poisoning Bulletin [edited]<https://foodpoisoningbulletin.com/2017/cyclospora-outbreak-sickens-almost-1000/>A huge cyclospora outbreak in the United States has sickened 988 people as of 13 Sep 2017.Every summer, there is a large cyclospora outbreak in the United States. The illness, caused by the _Cyclospora cayetensis_ parasite, is endemic to tropical and subtropical areas of the globe.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says the number includes people who reported international travel as well as those who did not report travel. The reports have come from 40 states.At least 553, or 56%, of those sickened did not travel internationally. That means they were infected in the United States. Illness onset dates started on or before 1 May 2017. The report says: ""It is too early to say whether cases of Cyclospora infection in different states are related to each other or to the same food item(s).""The case count per state is: Arizona (1), California (10), Colorado (6), Connecticut (23), Florida (68), Georgia (10), Illinois (17), Indiana (4), Iowa (14), Kansas (2), Louisiana (7), Maryland (12), Massachusetts (13), Michigan (3), Minnesota (11), Mississippi (1), Missouri (13), Montana (2), Nebraska (5), New Hampshire (4), New Jersey (19), New Mexico (1), New York (excluding NYC) (15), New York City (30), North Carolina (45), Ohio (16), Pennsylvania (2), Rhode Island (2), South Carolina (7), South Dakota (4), Tennessee (3), Texas (163), Utah (1), Virginia (7), Washington (1), West Virginia (2), and Wisconsin (9).Public health officials have not identified any specific vehicle of interest. In the past, these outbreaks have been linked to cilantro, mesclun lettuce, raspberries, basil, and snow peas.This huge outbreak is much larger than cyclospora outbreaks in previous years. In 2015, an outbreak sickened more than 500 people. And in 2016, just 88 people were sickened by this parasite.To protect yourself against this illness, thoroughly wash all fresh produce you buy. Unfortunately, it is quite difficult to wash the one-celled parasite from fruits and vegetables, especially those with crenelated or rough surfaces. Cooking will kill the parasite. Also, be sure to wash your hands well with soap and water after using the bathroom, taking care of someone who is sick, or changing diapers. Stay home from work or school if you have a diarrheal illness.The symptoms of cyclosporiasis include bloating, nausea, vomiting, a low fever, weight loss, abdominal cramps, fatigue, and watery diarrhea that is explosive and can last for weeks or months. There is treatment for this illness, but symptoms may still recur.Cyclosporiasis is not transmitted person-to-person. The oocysts are shed in feces. It takes up to 2 weeks for them to become infectious after they leave the body.[Byline: Linda Larsen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This multi-state outbreak is most probably caused by a contaminated food item, and, as pointed out, cilantro, mesclun lettuce, raspberries, basil, and snow peas have previously been linked to outbreaks in the United States and Canada (see previous ProMED reports below)._Cyclospora cayetensis_ has no known animal reservoir, and human infections occur when food is contaminated by human waste. We have reported an unusual number of cyclosporiasis outbreaks in 2017, including several cases infected in Mexico, and an outbreak in Mexico.Case-control studies can elucidate the risk factors, including specific food items responsible for the present multi-state outbreak. - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
