Associated Press [edited]<http://www.cdapress.com/article/20170922/AP/309229921>He didn't know what hit him when the 1st attack of undulant fever came. Despite significant symptoms, doctors didn't immediately diagnose that the Wheatland, WY farmer [J] had been infected with the human form of the animal disease brucellosis. Perhaps that's because it is rare in people, and its various symptoms don't point to an obvious cause.Undulant fever, also called Bang's disease, is marked by an irregular pattern of joint pain, fatigue, headaches, high fever, chills, drenching sweats, backache, weight loss, and loss of appetite. The farmer experienced a lot of that. Lasting effects include arthritis, depression, and organ swelling, the U.S. Department of Agriculture says.While few people die from undulant fever, it can be chronic, and hence ""is too serious to be dealt with lightly,"" the federal agency says. The farmer's tale of infection and suffering underscores one reason why federal and state officials targeted the disease for eradication more than 60 years ago. ""I just knew I was sick,"" the farmer said. ""I had pain like no other, indescribable pain between my hips. I had it in my back. It really hurt, an area as big as a cantaloupe or watermelon.""He spent 9 days in a hospital as doctors poked, prodded, and tested. ""They did a CAT scan or X-ray to figure out whether I had kidney stones,"" he said. ""Doctors didn't know what was going on."" Almost 3 months later, still undiagnosed and out of the hospital, the farmer fell on an icy walk and broke a rib. The pain from that injury did something funny; in time, it migrated to the opposite side of his body from the fracture. J went back to the hospital. The infection ""landed in my spine,"" he said. ""It's a real sharp pain. It's not directed to any one spot.""""They did another CAT scan and sent me straight to the neurosurgeons,"" he said. An infectious-disease specialist made the diagnosis. ""The doctor called me and said, 'You've got brucellosis.' They finally got the culture and finally got it right.""Undulant fever used to be far more widespread; 6400 cases were reported in 1947. A federal and state eradication program begun that same year has cut those to about 100 reported cases a year. Most cases, J said, probably involve large-animal veterinarians. To prevent infection, farmers and ranchers should wear sturdy rubber gloves when aiding stock during birthing; hunters should do the same when field-dressing game. Raw milk and unpasteurized milk products also can spread the disease.""It's not certain where I got it,"" the farmer said. ""It's untraceable."" Connecting the dots that lead to an infection can be difficult, even impossible, with this quirky disease. It is possible that 2 years ago, during a trip to India, J had butter or cheese made from unpasteurized milk. He doesn't think he got it from his farm. He has only horses, which can contract the disease, but no cattle, bison, pigs, or goats that more commonly carry it.But last November 2016, during the hunting season, he helped a friend field-dress and pack out an elk. During the excursion, he cut a finger. ""A rough bone piece got me on the hand,"" he said. ""It bled."" Even that theory of infection doesn't fit neatly with what's known about brucellosis and the_ Brucella_ bacterium that causes the disease. ""That elk would not have been in the prime time of her life to spread brucellosis,"" the farmer said, casting doubt on his own leading theory of infection.The farmer 1st noticed his undulant fever symptoms 10 weeks after retrieving the elk carcass, longer than the typical 6-week incubation period. But undulant fever also can lie dormant before exhibiting itself. Nevertheless, the farmer suspects the elk.Today, he is slowly healing, though he's weak and tires easily. ""My doctor is very attentive, since this is such a rare disease,"" he said. ""It's everybody's 1st try."" He received intravenous doses of an antibacterial over a 28-day period. ""That pretty much drove that pain away from me."" Now he's taking oral antimicrobials, 5 pills a day. ""They are very powerful,"" he said of the medications. ""(The doctor) has told me, more than likely, we're going to wipe it out.""[Byline: Angus M. Thuermer Jr]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The following manuscript from Turkey contrasts the clinical findings of vertebral osteomyelitis due to brucellosis with those of other etiologies:Horasan ES, Colak M, ErsÌ¦z G, U€Ùuz M, Kaya A: Clinical findings of vertebral osteomyelitis: Brucella spp. versus other etiologic agents. Rheumatol Int. 2012;32:3449-3453Abstract-----""We aimed to evaluate patients with vertebral osteomyelitis (VO) in our region and to compare the clinical and laboratory parameters of brucellar and non-brucellar VO patients (NBVO). This retrospective study included 80 patients with VO followed in our hospital between August 2004 and September 2010. The distribution of gender was 43 females (53.8%) and 37 males (46.2%) with average age of 52.5. Patients with brucellar vertebral VO (BVO; n = 30) accounted for 37.5% of all patients, and the rest (n = 50) were with NBVO. Co-morbidities existed in 32.5% of patients. In statistical comparison of VO patients who had the Brucella spp. as the infectious agent with patients of VO by non-brucellar pathogens, the following factors were found out to be significantly associated with BVO; low Charlson score (P = 0.0001), lower co-incidence with chronic renal failure (P = 0.001), high frequency of constitutional symptoms (P = 0.006), fever (P = 0.005), low-level inflammatory markers (WBC; Neutrophil; ESR; CRP, P values 0.006; 0.001; 0.022; 0.002, respectively), low-rate surgical treatment (P = 0.02) and culture positivity (P = 0.0001) and higher hemoglobin, total protein, albumin values (P = 0.002; 0.032; 0.016, respectively). VO may be strongly associated with brucellosis in patients presenting with fever and symptoms, low Charlson score, and indistinct inflammatory markers.""The specific species of _Brucella_ is not stated, but elk in that area of the USA are known to carry _B. abortus_, which is endemic in the bison in the area. ProMED would appreciate more information about the organism. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/251>.]
