Arab Jordan [in Arabic, trans. Mod.NS, edited]<http://www.arabjo.net/?p=18290>A total of 27 children suffered from hepatitis A in Al-Akaider area, 30 km (18 mi) northeast of Al-Mafraq city within Hosha district [Mafraq province]. This prompted the Ministry of Health to send a specialized epidemiological team to determine the causes of the outbreak. According to information received from the people, the disease has reached an epidemic level as the infection has spread among children, especially schoolchildren. This required closing the 2 schools located in the area to maintain the health and safety of children and stop the transmission of the disease.The Director of Health of Al-Mafraq, Hani Alimat, stated that the disease is endemic in the region, reducing the negative effect on children because the recovery from the infection gives immunity throughout life.Alimat said that the ministry had sent a specialized epidemiological team to take samples and examine them in laboratories. He indicated that the tests proved that the children are infected with hepatitis A, which is often caused by the use of unclean toilet facilities. He confirmed that the laboratory tests of the water lines in the houses showed that the water is clean.Alimat stressed that during visiting the 2 schools that have 280 students, they found that the health environment is poor due to having poor toilet facilities and drinking water, in addition to the absence of walls to protect these facilities and the presence of dead animals around the area. He explained that the increased number of cases made the Directorate of Health allocating a doctor to the health center throughout the day hours to receive patients. There are also field visits to the schools in addition to providing a health educator to give lectures on awareness of how to deal with the infection. Alimat also pointed out that the field visits of the health monitors in the area closed a shop for not complying with health requirements.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>via ProMED-MENA<promed-mena@promedmail.org>[The age-specific seroprevalence rates for hepatitis A antibody as reflected in the citation below supports, in the absence of widespread hepatitis A vaccine use, almost universal hepatitis A infection in Jordan occurring in childhood or adolescence.Hayajneh WA, Balbeesi A, Faouri S: Hepatitis A virus age-specific sero-prevalence and risk factors among Jordanian children. J Med Virol. 2015; 87: 569-74; <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmv.24137/full>Abstract--------Hepatitis A virus (HAV) has been a significant cause of infections among the children and adolescents of Jordan. Availability of safe vaccines made it necessary to identify the ill-defined temporal immunity trends for HAV and possible age-specific prevalence transitions. This community-based cross sectional study was conducted during the period July-August 2008 on 3066 recruited subjects from the 12 governorates of Jordan, with predefined criteria. Several households were chosen at random within each selected block to enroll the subjects. They were interviewed and data were collected. Their sera were tested for total antibodies against HAV. A multivariate model was then performed to identify the possible risk factors. The HAV seroprevalence rates among the age categories-second year, 2-4 years, 5-9 years, 10-14 years, 15-19 years, and those above 20 years were 26 percent, 32 percent, 44 percent, 63 percent, 78 percent, and 94 percent, respectively. The model revealed the association of several risk factors for higher HAV seroprevalence rates: (i) older age groups; (ii) lower maternal education levels; (iii) residing in certain governorates; (iv) using public net drinking water; and (v) avoiding use of public net sewage system. This study provided strong evidence for continuous transition of HAV epidemiology towards intermediate endemicity in Jordan, with more susceptible adolescents and adults. Following the World Health Organization (WHO) recommendations for countries with intermediate endemicity, large-scale hepatitis A vaccination is recommended for children in Jordan. This is strengthened by the availability of effective and safe HAV vaccines, improving the socio-economic status of the Jordanians, and increasing life expectancy among Jordanians. - Mod.LLMaps of Jordan can be seen at <http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/atlas_middle_east/jordan_divisions.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/63190>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
