El Mundo [in Spanish, machine trans., edited]<http://www.elmundo.es/ciencia-y-salud/2017/09/27/59cbc4c246163f38268b45f6.html>The Ministry of Health has confirmed this [Wed 27 Sep 2017], the intoxication so far in 2017 of 154 people in Spain and other European countries who consumed Spanish tuna kept in poor conditions. They also added that at least 105 cases are related to products of the Almerian brand Garciden.The Spanish Agency for Consumption, Food Safety and Nutrition (AECOSAN) reported in a note on [Wed 27 Sep 2017] that they have managed 15 alerts throughout 2017, for the presence of high concentrations of histamine in tuna. High concentrations of histamine in tuna, and other fish such as bonito and mackerel, are caused by poor fish conservation conditions, and produce food poisoning that is generally not serious.The European Commission, according to the note, sent a letter to Spain on [Thu 14 Sep 2017] showing their ""concern"" about this situation and requesting information about the actions taken to deal with and stop bad practices in the handling of tuna. Fraudulent use of vegetable substances that color red tuna to appear fresher is also linked to the presence of high amounts of histamine, a substance already found in fish in which bacteria have grown due to inadequate refrigeration.Brussels has stressed that the concerned tuna was destined for the canning industry and received a treatment that modified its color to give it a fresher appearance -- which can lead to serious cases of food poisoning --, to sell it at a higher price.According to the Guardia Civil last week, poisonings have affected Andalusia, Murcia, Valencia, Catalonia, Aragon, Castilla y LeÌ n, Madrid and the Basque Country, but also to Germany, France, Italy and Portugal.Aecosan has ensured that the competent authorities of both the Autonomous and the State administrations are collecting the information required by the European Commission and maintain the necessary mechanisms to ensure the safety of the fish they marketed. The agency under the Ministry of Health has indicated that the tuna production line of the company Garciden remains closed as a precautionary measure.Intoxication has occurred with episodes of sore throat, flushing, facial sweating, nausea, vomiting, headache and cutaneous erythema.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Two good reviews on the subject can be found at:1.- Taylor SL, Stratton JE and Nordlee JA: Histamine poisoning (scombroid fish poisoning): an allergy-like intoxication. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1989;27(4-5): 225-40.Abstract--------""Histamine poisoning results from the consumption of foods, typically certain types of fish and cheeses that contain unusually high levels of histamine. Spoiled fish of the families, Scombridae and Scomberesocidae (e.g. tuna, mackerel, bonito), are commonly implicated in incidents of histamine poisoning, which leads to the common usage of the term, ""scombroid fish poisoning"", to describe this illness. However, certain non-scombroid fish, most notably mahi-mahi, bluefish, and sardines, when spoiled are also commonly implicated in histamine poisoning. Also, on rare occasions cheeses, especially Swiss cheese, can be implicated in histamine poisoning. The symptoms of histamine poisoning generally resemble the symptoms encountered with IgE-mediated food allergies. The symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, an oral burning sensation or peppery taste, hives, itching, red rash, and hypotension. The onset of the symptoms usually occurs within a few minutes after ingestion of the implicated food, and the duration of symptoms ranges from a few hours to 24 h. Antihistamines can be used effectively to treat this intoxication. Histamine is formed in foods by certain bacteria that are able to decarboxylate the amino acid, histidine. However, foods containing unusually high levels of histamine may not appear to be outwardly spoiled. Foods with histamine concentrations exceeding 50 mg per 100 g of food are generally considered to be hazardous. Histamine formation in fish can be prevented by proper handling and refrigerated storage while the control of histamine formation in cheese seems dependent on insuring that histamine-producing bacteria are not present in significant numbers in the raw milk.""2.- Hungerford JM: Scombroid poisoning: a review. Toxicon. 2010;56(2):231-43. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2010.02.006.Abstract--------""Scombroid poisoning, also called histamine fish poisoning, is an allergy-like form of food poisoning that continues to be a major problem in seafood safety. The exact role of histamine in scombroid poisoning is not straightforward. Deviations from the expected dose-response have led to the advancement of various possible mechanisms of toxicity, none of them proven. Histamine action levels are used in regulation until more is known about the mechanism of scombroid poisoning. Scombroid poisoning and histamine are correlated but complicated. Victims of scombroid poisoning respond well to antihistamines, and chemical analyses of fish implicated in scombroid poisoning generally reveal elevated levels of histamine. Scombroid poisoning is unique among the seafood toxins since it results from product mishandling rather than contamination from other trophic levels. Inadequate cooling following harvest promotes bacterial histamine production, and can result in outbreaks of scombroid poisoning. Fish with high levels of free histidine, the enzyme substrate converted to histamine by bacterial histidine decarboxylase, are those most often implicated in scombroid poisoning. Laboratory methods and screening methods for detecting histamine are available in abundance, but need to be compared and validated to harmonize testing. Successful field testing, including dockside or on-board testing needed to augment HACCP efforts will have to integrate rapid and simplified detection methods with simplified and rapid sampling and extraction. Otherwise, time-consuming sample preparation reduces the impact of gains in detection speed on the overall analysis time.""It is not stated in the posting what substance was used to modify the tuna to have it retain its reddish color, but in the USA, carbon monoxide is legal to use to do so and as a part of ""tasteless smoke"" is GRAS (generally regarded as safe) according to the US FDA (<https://www.fda.gov/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/GRAS/NoticeInventory/ucm154892.htm>), however in this FDA letter it is stated that ""Partially decomposed tuna can contain high levels of scombrotoxin, and the preservative effect of tasteless smoke could mask visual signs of decomposition. Section 402(b)(3) of the FFD&C Act provides that a food shall be deemed to be adulterated if damage or inferiority has been concealed in any manner. Similarly, if the application of tasteless smoke causes the color of the tuna flesh to be enhanced, potentially causing consumers to be misled about the true nature or value of the tuna, the product may be adulterated. Section 402(b)(4) of the FFD&C Act provides that a food shall be deemed to be adulterated if any substance has been added thereto or packed therewith so as to make it appear better or of greater value than it is.""The following from Berkeley Wellness <http://www.berkeleywellness.com/healthy-eating/food-safety/article/red-tuna-not-always-fresh-tuna> discusses the issue:""Redder tuna means fresher tuna, right? Not necessarily. Fish suppliers have a trick up their sleeves: they may treat the tuna with carbon monoxide to make it look redder. Here's how it works: there's a pigment in the fish flesh that turns bright red when it picks up oxygen from the bloodstream. After the fish dies, exposure to air causes oxidaå tion, which turns the flesh brown, indicating a decline in quality. Treating fish with carbon monoxide permanently changes the pigment color to bright red, so the color of the fish never changes.""The process itself is safe, but the practice can be deceptive, since unscrupulous fish dealers may use it to make old fish appear fresh. It can turn even 3-week old tuna from brown back to red and reduce its odor. In one experiment, researchers at the University of Florida found that tuna gassed with carbon monå oxide maintained its bright red color for 11 days in the refrigerator and for 7 days when stored at slightly higher temperature. Treated tuna also had less odor after 4 days in the refrigerator than untreated tuna.""Of more concern, old fish can make you sick: as fish decay (with or without carbon monoxide treatment), histamine can form in the tissue. Histamine can be toxic at high levels, resulting in a foodborne illness called scombroid poisoning, whose sympå toms are often confused with an allergic reaction. While carbon monoxide can delay some bacterial growth, histamine may still form and is not destroyed by cooking. The FDA requires carbon monoxide-treated fish to be labeled as such, but that's typically not done, and no one enforces the law. The European Union, Canada, Japan, and Singapore ban the practice.""Bottom line: tuna that looks unnaturally red has likely been gassed, but it usually takes a trained eye to distinguish the color differences between fresh and treated fish. Shop and dine at reputable establishments that have a fast turnover of fish (even if they sell treated tuna, there's a better chance it's at least fresh). Keep in mind, also, that not all tuna is bright red when fresh. Some top-quality species are pale pink or brownish red."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6010>.]
