KTUU [edited]<http://www.ktuu.com/content/news/Three-cases-of-botulism-in-Alaska-this-year---heres-how-to-can-safely--444068773.html>It seems like almost every Alaskan has a jar of canned salmon in their pantry. Often, it seems, we use canned vegetables and meat like money, trading favors for food. Most families have a secret recipe for smoked salmon or plans to savor the pink flesh of summer's catch during the dark winter months. But, your grandmother's recipe for canning food may not be the best way.""I'm thinking about my grandmother, even my mother in some instances have done the canning and food preservation for years and years and years but over time research has been more extensive and has shown that some changes need to happen,"" Julie Cascio a professor and canning expert at the UAF Cooperative Extension Service said.A pressure canner is required for processing fish or other less acidic meats, Cascio said. The high temperatures reached under pressure are necessary to ensure a safe product--set the timer and temperature to 100 minutes at 240 degrees. Pressure canning uses both pressure and heat and can reach higher temperatures than simply boiling or smoking the meat, which means you're more protected against botulism that can happen in meats, fish and vegetables.Epidemiologist Louisa Castrodale with the Department of Health and Human Service says this year [2017] there have been 3 cases of botulism in Alaska. The average hovers anywhere between zero cases, to 10, according to DHHS.Here's how Castrodale describes how someone feels when they eat food and get sick because of botulism: ""People will feel they'll start feeling like they're being paralyzed, no one's ever said that it hurts, I don't think it hurts, it's just this shutting down of the nerves to the point where you're not able to breath but people are conscious and can understand what's happening.""Castrodale says Alaska has a high number of people who can food, perhaps more than most states. ""The cases in Alaska have traditionally been among Alaska Natives who have consumed traditionally aged foods so these are foods that aren't typically cooked,"" Castrodale said, ""it's generally in an animal product like fish-head or seal or seal oil and it's aged and so that process allows the bacteria to grow and then form the toxin.""The Cooperative Extension has a huge amount of information on how to product your food from being spoiled or from getting you sick.Here are some highlights for smoking or jarring fish: Smoking fish is not a true food preservation technique, it changes the flavor and texture but does not ""preserve"" or create a shelf-stable product. Even refrigeration won't guarantee that smoked fish will stay safe to eat. The bacteria that cause botulism could start to grow after 2-3 weeks of refrigeration. For long-term storage, smoked fish must be frozen or canned. Jarred or canned smoked fish must be processed in a pressure canner to destroy _Clostridium botulinum_ spore. The temperature of home smokers will vary depending on the type of smoker but most will generally reach at least 130 deg and up to 160 deg F. These temperatures are high enough to dry the fish if air flow isn't severely restricted. The best way to know if the fish is done is to measure the weight loss, which is how much moisture evaporates during smoking. A 10 percent weight loss creates good-quality product after canning. The moisture loss in most smoked fish is usually 20 to 30 percent. Oily fish such as black cod and Chinook salmon will seem very moist due to their higher fat content.Recommended for jarring fish - Process one-pint jars for 100 minutes. - Use 10 pounds pressure for a weighted pressure gauge. - Use 11 pounds pressure for a dial pressure gauge. If you use 1‰ ã2-pint jars, process for 100 minutes also, using the same pressures recommended for one-pint jars[Byline: Rebecca Palsha]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Much of the botulism in Alaska is in native Americans and similarly in Canada.The following publication summarizes 2 decades of botulism in Canada, a great majority occurring due to type E in the native population, associated with ingestion of food products from marine sources:Leclair D, Fung J, Isaac-Renton JL, et al. Foodborne botulism in Canada, 1985-2005. Emerg Infect Dis. 2013; 19(6): 961-8; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3713816/>.Abstract--------""During 1985-2005, a total of 91 laboratory-confirmed outbreaks of foodborne botulism occurred in Canada; these outbreaks involved 205 cases and 11 deaths. Of the outbreaks, 75 (86.2 percent) were caused by _Clostridium botulinum_ type E, followed by types A (7/8.1 percent) and B (5/5.7 percent). Approximately 85 percent of the outbreaks occurred in Alaska Native communities, particularly the Inuit of Nunavik in northern Quebec and the First Nations population of the Pacific coast of British Columbia. These populations were predominantly exposed to type E botulinum toxin through the consumption of traditionally prepared marine mammal and fish products. Two botulism outbreaks were attributed to commercial ready-to-eat meat products and 3 to foods served in restaurants; several cases were attributed to non-Native home-prepared foods. A total of 3 affected pregnant women delivered healthy infants. Improvements in botulism case identification and early treatment have resulted in a reduction in the case-fatality rate in Canada.""The following was abstracted from a 2001 CDC report on foodborne botulism in the native American population in Alaska and underscores changes in the fermentation techniques which appear to have increased the risks of this intoxication (<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5032a2.htm>):""This report illustrates how the use of nontraditional fermentation methods is associated with foodborne botulism in Alaska. Botulism results from eating preformed toxin produced by _Clostridium botulinum_. Botulism intoxication can result in death, which most often is caused by respiratory failure. The latent period is typically 12-36 hours but can range from 6 hours to 10 days (1). _C. botulinum_ and closely related organisms produce toxins designated as types A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. Human botulism is most commonly caused by types A, B, and E. Type E is associated with foods of marine or freshwater origin. Alaska's foodborne botulism rates exceed those in any other state and are among the highest in the world (1). During 1950-2000, Alaska recorded 226 cases of foodborne botulism from 114 outbreaks. All patients were Alaska Natives, and all cases with known causes were associated with eating fermented foods (1,2). Approximately 27 percent of US foodborne botulism cases occur in Alaska.""In traditional fermentation, food is kept in a grass-lined hole in the ground or a wooden barrel sunken into the ground or is placed in a shady area above ground for several weeks to months. Since the 1970s, however, plastic or glass containers have been used and fermentation has been done above ground or indoors. The anaerobic condition of sealed containers and warmer temperatures make fermentation more rapid and production of botulism toxin more likely (3-5). These nontraditional methods have been associated with increased botulism rates in Alaska during 1970-1989 (4,5). Although a plastic container was not used in this outbreak, the beaver tail and paw were fermented in a closed rice sack and stored in a warm area.""Early diagnosis and antitoxin treatment have contributed to the decline of the case fatality rate from approximately 31 percent during 1950-1959 to no deaths in Alaska since 1994 (1). However, Alaska continues to have high foodborne botulism rates because fermented foods are part of Alaska Native culture. In a 1999 survey, 107 (77 percent) of 140 Alaska Natives reported having eaten fermented foods at least once in their lifetime (3).""References----------1. Beller M. Botulism in Alaska: a guide for physicians and health-care providers -- 1998 update. Anchorage, Alaska: Alaska Department of Health and Social Services, 1998.2. Wainwright RB, Heyward WL, Middaugh JP, et al. Food-borne botulism in Alaska, 1947-1985: epidemiology and clinical findings. J Infect Dis. 1988; 157: 1158-62.3. Chiou L, Hennessy T, Horn A, et al. A survey of knowledge, attitudes, and practices related to fermented foods known to cause botulism among Alaska Natives of southwest Alaska. [Abstract]. Presented at the 2nd International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases, Atlanta, Georgia, July 2000.4. Eisenberg MS, Bender TR. Plastic bags and botulism: a new twist to an old hazard of the north. Alaska Med 1976; July: 47-9.5. Shaffer N, Wainwright RB, Middaugh JP. Botulism among Alaska Natives: the role of changing food preparation and consumption practices. West J Med. 1990;153: 390-3. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/206>.]
