Public Health Agency of Canada, [edited]<http://tinyurl.com/yaqf89rg>The Public Health Agency of Canada is collaborating with provincial public health partners, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency and Health Canada to investigate an outbreak of _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Enteritidis infections in 4 provinces with cases of human illness linked to frozen raw breaded chicken products._Salmonella_ is commonly found in raw chicken and frozen raw breaded chicken products. The risk to Canadians is low and illnesses can be avoided if safe food handling, preparation and cooking practices are followed when preparing these types of food products. This outbreak is a reminder that frozen raw breaded chicken products contain raw poultry and should be handled and prepared no differently from other raw poultry products. Follow cooking instructions carefully and verify the internal temperature after cooking, as recommended, before consuming these products. Frozen raw breaded chicken products must be cooked to an internal temperature of at least 74 deg C (165 deg F) to ensure they are safe to eat.Investigation summary---------------------Currently, there are 13 cases of salmonellosis in 4 provinces: Ontario (7), Quebec (2), New Brunswick (2), and Nova Scotia (2). 4 people have been hospitalized. No deaths have been reported. Individuals became sick between June 2017 and August 2017. The average age of cases is 38 years (range 0-82 years), with approximately equal distribution among males and females. Based on the investigation findings to date, exposure to frozen raw breaded chicken products has been identified as a source of illness. The outbreak investigation is active, and the public health notice will be updated on a regular basis as the investigation evolves.Who is most at risk?--------------------Anyone can become sick with salmonellosis, but infants, children, seniors, and those with weakened immune systems are at higher risk of serious illness because their immune systems are more fragile. Most people who become ill from salmonellosis will recover fully after a few days. It is possible for some people to be infected with the bacteria and not get sick or show any symptoms, but still be able to spread the infection to others.What you should do to protect your health?------------------------------------------While frozen raw breaded chicken products may appear to be pre-cooked or browned, they contain raw chicken and should be handled and prepared no differently from other raw poultry products. If you are preparing frozen raw breaded chicken products, such as nuggets, strips, or burgers, the following precautions should be taken to protect your health:- Do not eat raw or undercooked frozen breaded chicken products. Cook all frozen breaded products to an internal temperature of at least 74 Deg C (165 Deg F) to ensure they are safe to eat.- Microwave cooking of frozen raw breaded poultry products including chicken nuggets, strips, or burgers is not recommended due to uneven heating.- Always follow package cooking instructions, including products labelled Uncooked, Cook and Serve, Ready to Cook, and Oven Ready.- Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water before and after handling frozen raw breaded chicken products.- Use a separate plate, cutting board, and utensils when handling frozen, raw, breaded, chicken products to prevent the spread of harmful bacteria.- Use a digital food thermometer to verify that frozen raw breaded chicken products have reached at least 74 deg C (165 deg F). Insert the digital food thermometer through the side of the product, all the way to the middle. Oven-safe meat thermometers that are designed for testing whole poultry and roasts during cooking are not suitable for testing nuggets, strips or burgers.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This post from Health Canada reports 13 cases of _S._ Enteritidis who became ill between June 2017 and August 2017. A previous report (Salmonellosis, st Enteritidis - Canada: frozen chicken products 20170627.5134014) reported 7 cases who became ill between April and May of 2017. Both outbreaks were linked to frozen chicken products. Canadian Food Inspection Agency, which had initially refused to name the implicated products, eventually posted a recall notice (<http://www.foodsafetynews.com/2017/07/loblaws-recalls-chicken-nuggets-linked-to-salmonella-outbreak/#.Wc5CGoWcFPa>) stating Loblaw Companies Ltd. was pulling its President's Choice ""Pub Recipe Chicken Nuggets"" from stores nationwide because of possible _Salmonella_ contamination.ProMED would like to know if the isolates linked to the 2 outbreaks are the same and if the producer is also the same.The key to preventing foodborne salmonellosis is a combination of adequate cooking and appropriate kitchen hygiene, as outlined in the article above. It is important to know that microwave cooking can be inadequate because the potential for uneven heating in these devices. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12>.]
