EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited][re: ProMED-mail Typhoid fever - Europe: MSM, alert, RFI 20170927.5345228]----------------------------------------------------------------------ECDC is monitoring this outbreak through EPIS FWD [Epidemic Intelligence Information System for food- and waterborne diseases and zoonoses] and through epidemic intelligence. A short summary of the latest information about this event is available on the ECDC Communicable Disease Threat Report of week 38/2017 (17-23 Sep 2017) and reports as of 21 Sep 2017 a total of 8 cases (France 3; Germany 2; Croatia 1; Italy 1; Czech Rep ) and 3 probable (Croatia). A new update will be published on [30 Sep 2017]<https://ecdc.europa.eu/sites/portal/files/documents/Communicable-disease-threats-report-23-sep-2017.pdf>Text extracted from this document:On 8 Sep 2017, France reported 3 confirmed cases of typhoid fever among unvaccinated participants of the Rainbow Gathering that took place in north-eastern Italy, in Tramonti di Sopra, Pordenone from 23 Jul 2017 to 21 Aug 2017. The 3 patients are aged 3, 24 and 26 years. Symptom onset ranged from 10 Aug 2017 to 28 Aug 2017 and cases were laboratory-confirmed between 31 Aug 2017 and 2 Sep 2017. Participants reported poor hygiene conditions during the event that was attended by 3000 participants, including bathing in a river and using collective toilets dug in the ground.As of 21 Sep 2017, several EU countries reported additional cases related to this mass gathering: France (3 confirmed cases), Germany (2 confirmed cases), the Czech Republic (1 confirmed case), Croatia (1 confirmed and 3 probable cases) and Italy (1 confirmed case). Austria, Denmark, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia and Sweden report no typhoid fever cases associated with this event or no cases at all in 2017.TESSy [The European Surveillance System] data: each year, 600 to 700 cases of typhoid fever are reported in the EU/EEA by 25 countries. The UK, France, and Italy account respectively for 34 percent, 21 percent, and 17 percent of the cases. Travel information was available for 53 percent cases in 2012-2016 and of these, the majority (87 percent) were reported as associated to travel. India and Pakistan accounted for 60 percent of the travel associated cases. 35 percent of the cases were 25-44 years old and male cases were slightly more common than female, particularly in this age group.ECDC assessment---------------Overall, 8 confirmed and 3 possible cases were reported associated with this event. Identification of additional typhoid fever cases associated with this event is not unexpected as the gathering lasted 4 weeks and a large part of the participants are likely non-immunized. The incubation period for typhoid fever is usually 8 to 14 days but can be up to 60 days. There is a very low risk for further spread to the general population in the EU/EEA.While humans are the only reservoir for the causative agent _Salmonella_ Typhi, 2-5 percent of middle-aged infected individuals can become chronic carriers, with the possibility to transmit the disease without experiencing symptoms. Typhoid fever vaccination is not recommended for European residents unless they travel to endemic countries. Vaccine effectiveness is moderate and protection does not last long. Also, vaccination is often not accepted by certain target groups.Rainbow gatherings are often connected to specific communities and target audiences. Rainbow gatherings are currently or have been recently held in southern Italy, the Czech Republic, in the south-east of England, Bulgaria, Hungary, and the Spanish Pyrenees. Countries hosting Rainbow Gatherings should consider increasing awareness with regard to the risk of contracting typhoid fever, especially if there are non-immunized participants who just returned from endemic countries, and make recommendations for sanitation, hand washing, food handling hygiene, and vaccination campaigns among participants. There is a low risk for further spread to the general population in the EU/EEA. The risk is mostly associated with food handling by carriers.In addition to emphasising hand washing as a routine precautionary measure and scrupulous cleanliness when handling food, testing of food handlers at recent Rainbow Gatherings could be considered.--Communicated by:EpiCore Global Surveillance Project<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED thanks the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project member for this valuable information.Regarding typhoid immunization, an important report has been published online yesterday (28 Sep 2017) in Lancet: Jin C, Gibani MM, Moore M, et al: Efficacy and immunogenicity of a Vi-tetanus toxoid conjugate vaccine in the prevention of typhoid fever using a controlled human infection model of _Salmonella_ Typhi: a randomised controlled, phase 2b trial. Lancet <http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(17)32149-9.pdf>.An excellent accompanying editorial (Nicholas A Feasey NA, Levine MM: Typhoid vaccine development with a human challenge model. Lancet(<http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(17)32407-8.pdf>) is reproduced below (the references cited can be found at the original URL):""Experimental human typhoid fever challenge was first described in 1896 by Wright, who vaccinated 2 men against typhoid fever and challenged one with what was then known as _Salmonella typhosa_ [1]. While challenge models are sometimes controversial, they offer enormous potential to study the pathogenesis of disease and to accelerate vaccine development, particularly in human-restricted pathogens such as _Salmonella enterica_ serovar Typhi. The Maryland typhoid human challenge model, which ran from 1952 to 1974, led to insights into typhoid fever and facilitated the development of live attenuated typhoid vaccine Ty21a [2, 3]. A 21st-century typhoid challenge model has been developed by the Oxford Vaccine Group [4].In The Lancet, Celina Jin and colleagues [5] report results from challenging 3 groups of healthy adults from Oxford, UK, who were randomly assigned to receive Vi-conjugate vaccine, unconjugated Vi-polysaccharide vaccine, or control vaccine (ACYW135 meningococcal conjugate) with wild-type Quailes strain _S._ Typhi. Results of this volunteer challenge have been awaited with much anticipation by the public health community interested in control of typhoid fever in endemic areas of south Asia and sub-Saharan Africa where _S._ Typhi is increasingly antibiotic resistant and few treatment options remain. Vi-conjugate vaccines that have been in development represent a new instrument to help to control typhoid. The most advanced conjugate vaccine, Typbar-TCV (Vi-polysaccharide [Vi-PS] conjugated to tetanus toxoid, Vi-TT, Bharat Biotech, Hyderabad, India), is licensed in India where it has been shown to elicit robust serum Vi antibody responses after only 1 dose, even in Indian infants as young as 6 months [6]. In toddlers, older children, and adults, Typbar-TCV was shown to be significantly more immunogenic than the unconjugated Bharat Vi-PS [6]. Bharat Biotech has submitted an application to WHO for pre-qualification of their Vi-TT. If approved, this would allow the vaccine to be procured by UN agencies. However, despite evidence of safety and immunogenicity in Indian children and adults, heretofore, there has been no evidence of actual efficacy of the vaccine in diminishing the attack rate of typhoid fever upon exposure to virulent _S._ Typhi compared with the control participants. Importantly, the authors provide the first data documenting that Typbar-TCV is protective.112 participants were enrolled in this observer and participant-blinded, randomised controlled trial, which showed that the Vi-TT is well tolerated, achieved 100 percent seroconversion of Vi antibody (versus 89 percent for Vi-PS), and stimulated significantly higher geometric mean titres than did unconjugated Vi-PS. Most importantly, Jin and colleagues document that Vi-TT recipients had a significantly lower attack rate for the primary aim endpoint diagnosing typhoid fever than control recipients. With the primary endpoint used in this ambitious trial, the attack rate for typhoid diagnosis was 24 (77 percent) of 31 in control participants, 13 (35 percent) of 37 in Vi-TT recipients, and 13 (35 percent) of 35 in those who received Vi-PS. This translates into vaccine efficacies of 54.6 percent (95 percent CI 26.8-71.8) for Vi-TT and 52.0 percent (23.2-70.0) for Vi-PS.As the authors suggest, the field efficacy of Vi-TT vaccine might be higher; for example, a well designed and executed field trial of an unlicensed Vi-conjugate produced by the National Institutes of Health (Bethesda, MD, USA) in Vietnamese pre-school children showed an efficacy of 89 percent (95 percent CI 76-97) over 46 months of follow-up. [7] One possible explanation lies in the primary endpoint of so-called typhoid infection used by Jin and colleagues [5] (persistent fever of 38 deg C or higher for 12 hours or longer or _S._ Typhi bacteremia), which arguably is better suited to studying typhoid pathogenesis than assessing the efficacy of typhoid vaccines. Using slightly different endpoints such as fever 38 deg C or higher followed by a positive blood culture, similar to surveillance in a field trial and to endpoints used in the Maryland challenge model, Jin and colleagues [5] report that the efficacy of Vi-TT was 87.1 percent (95 percent CI 47.2-96.9), while efficacy of Vi-PS was 52.3 percent (-4.2 to 78.2). Although future typhoid challenges based on this as a co-primary endpoint would require larger sample sizes, the information gained might be more relevant and predictive of the efficacy that might be noted in a randomised controlled field trial. This highlights the need for the phase 3 and 4 trials, the first of which is expected to be initiated in Asia in late 2017 by the Typhoid Vaccine Acceleration Consortium (TyVAC), a partnership between the University of Maryland, the University of Oxford, and PATH funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. However, because it will be some years before these field trials are reported, Jin and colleagues' challenge study results are timely and engender optimism that an effective new instrument has become available to help to control typhoid in hyperendemic populations."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6010>.]
