WHO [edited]<https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/madagascar-donor-alert-29september2017.pdf>Plague in Madagascar--------------------Pneumonic plague has been detected in several cities in Madagascar. It is a form of plague that is highly transmissible (person-to-person) and quickly causes death without treatment. WHO is concerned that the outbreak may spread because it is already present in several cities and this is just the start of the plague epidemic season, which usually runs from September to April. Plague is endemic to Madagascar but contrary to past outbreaks, this one affects large urban areas, including the capital and port cities. The overall risk of further spread at the national level is high, at the regional level is moderate due to frequent flights to neighboring Indian Ocean islands, and at the global level is perceived to be low. The outbreak is affecting the densely populated cities in Madagascar that include Antananarivo/Analamanga with 3 724 021 inhabitants, Tamatave/ Atsinanana with 1 412 021 inhabitants, Majunga /Boeny with 889 277 inhabitants, and Finanrantsoa /Haut Matsuartra with 1 333 550 inhabitants. Antananarivo is the capital city of Madagascar. A total of 8 regions have reported cases including Sava, Boeni and Atsinanana. These coastal regions are non-endemic areas for bubonic plague. Many of the cases identified are directly or indirectly linked to the 1st recognized case, which is evidence of person-to-person transmission of pneumonic plague. Urgent public health response is required and support is needed to strengthen capacities already available at country level to control the outbreak.  People Affected----------------A total of 104 cases of which 52 pneumonic plague (23 Aug 2017 - 28 Sep 2017)Up to 20 deaths 19.23 percent case fatality rate (CFR) of the current outbreak  Key facts--------- - Plague is caused by the bacteria _Yersinia pestis_, a zoonotic bacteria, usually found in small mammals and their fleas.  - Plague can kill quickly if left untreated, but common antimicrobials can effectively cure it if they are delivered early. - People infected with plague usually develop ""flu-like"" symptoms after an incubation period of 1-7 days. - There are 2 main clinical forms of plague infection: bubonic and pneumonic.  - Bubonic plague is the most common form and is spread by rats, pneumonic by person-to-person transmission. The current outbreak combines both forms of plague.  - Plague is endemic to Madagascar, where around 400 cases of, mostly bubonic, plague are reported annually  - Madagascar's last severe plague outbreak in December 2016 affected 68 people and caused 27 deaths.  --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Fri 29 Sep 2017Source: WHO [edited]<https://reliefweb.int/report/madagascar/plague-madagascar-disease-outbreak-news-29-september-2017>Plague - Madagascar: Disease outbreak news (29 September 2017)--------------------------------------------------------------On [Wed 23 Aug 2017], a 31-year-old male from Tamatave, visiting Ankazobe District in central highlands, developed malaria-like symptoms. On [Sun 27 Aug 2017], he developed respiratory symptoms during his journey in a shared public taxi from Ankazobe District to Tamatave (via Antananarivo). His condition worsened and he died. His body was prepared for a funeral at the nearest hospital, Moramanga District Hospital, without safety procedures. Additionally, 31 people who came into contact with this case either through direct contact with the primary case or had other epidemiological links, became ill, and 4 cases of them died.The outbreak was detected on [Mon 11 Sep 2017], following the death of a 47-year-old woman from Antananarivo, who was admitted to a hospital with respiratory failure caused by pneumonic plague. The public health authorities Direction de la Veille Sanitaire et de la Surveillance Epid̩miologique (DVSSE) immediately launched field investigations.As of 28 September 2017, a total of 51 cases (suspected, probable and confirmed) of pneumonic plague, including 12 deaths were reported in the country. The diagnosis was confirmed by the Institut Pasteur de Madagascar by polymerase chain reaction test and using rapid diagnostic test.In addition to the 51 suspected, probable and confirmed cases of pneumonic plague, and during the same period another 53 cases of bubonic plague including 7 deaths have been reported throughout the country. One case of septicaemic plague has also been identified and they were not directly linked to the outbreak.Public health response----------------------The Ministry of Health activated crisis units in Antananarivo and Toamasina and all cases have been provided access to treatment at no cost. Active case finding and contact tracing are on-going and all pneumonic cases are being isolated and treated, and all contacts are receiving chemoprophylaxis.There are additional ongoing key public health response measures which include: - Ongoing investigation of new cases. - Strengthening of the epidemiological surveillance in the affected and surrounding districts, including contact identification, administration of chemoprophylaxis, and monitoring close contacts of pneumonic plague cases. - Disinfection of affected areas, including rodent and vector control. - Raising awareness of the population about prevention and actions after exposure. - Raising awareness among health care workers and providing information including infection control measures, and implementation of safe burial practices.WHO risk assessment-------------------Plague is an infectious disease caused by the bacterium _Yersinia pestis_, a zoonotic bacteria, usually found in small mammals and their fleas. It is transmitted between animals from their fleas. Humans can be contaminated by the bite of infected fleas, through direct contact with infected materials or by inhalation.There are 3 forms of plague infection, depending on the route of infection: bubonic, septicaemic and pneumonic.Bubonic plague (known in medieval Europe as the 'Black Death') is the most common form of plague and is caused by the bite of an infected flea. Plague bacillus, _Yersinia pestis_, enters at the bite and travels through the lymphatic system to the nearest lymph node where it replicates itself. The lymph node then becomes inflamed, tense and painful, and is called a ""bubo"". At advanced stages of the infection the inflamed lymph nodes can turn into open sores filled with puss.Pneumonic plague-or lung-based plague- is the most virulent form of plague. Incubation period can be as short as 24 hours. Typically, the pneumonic form is caused by spread to the lungs from advanced bubonic plague. However, a person with secondary pneumonic plague may form aerosolized infective droplets and transmit plague via droplets to other humans. Untreated pneumonic plague is always fatal. Septicemic plague occurs when infection spreads through the bloodstream, following a bubonic or a pneumonic plague.Plague can be a very severe disease in people, particularly in its septicaemic and pneumonic forms, with a case-fatality ratio of 30-100 percent if left untreated. The pneumonic form is invariably fatal unless treated early, is especially contagious and can trigger severe epidemics through person-to-person contact via droplets in the air.Plague is an endemic disease in Madagascar; cases of bubonic plague are reported nearly every year, during the epidemic season (between September and April). However, the ongoing pneumonic plague event has been reported in a non-endemic area and in densely populated coastal cities for the 1st time.Pneumonic plague is a form of plague that is transmissible from person-to-person, with a potential to trigger severe epidemics if inadequately controlled. Detection of this outbreak occurred more than 2 weeks after the 1st case died during which cases travelled to different parts of the country, including the capital Antananarivo. Therefore, the overall risk at the national level is high. The overall regional risk is moderate due to frequent flights to neighboring Indian Ocean islands. The global risk is low.WHO advice----------Prevention and control measures: - Preventive measures include informing people when zoonotic plague is present in their environment and advising them to take precautions against flea bites and not to handle animal carcasses. The most rapid and effective method for controlling fleas is to apply an appropriate insecticide formulated as a dust or low-volume spray. People, especially health workers, should also avoid direct contact with infected tissues such as buboes, or close exposure to patients with pneumonic plague. Important prevention and control measures include: - Find and stop the source of infection. - Protect health workers: inform and train them on infection prevention and control. Isolate: patients with pneumonic plague. They should be isolated so as not to infect others via air droplets.Surveillance:  - Identify and monitor close contacts of pneumonic plague patients and give them a 7 day chemoprophylaxis. - Obtain specimens which should be carefully collected and sent to labs for testing. - Ensure safe burial practices.Treatment:Untreated plague can be rapidly fatal, so early diagnosis and treatment is essential for survival and reduction of complications. Antimicrobials and supportive therapy are effective against plague if patients are diagnosed in time.Travel advice:WHO advises against any restriction on travel or trade on Madagascar based on the available information. It is recommended to provide information at the ports of entry (airports, seaports) of Madagascar about the disease and the necessary protection measures required.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The rapid increase in number of cases of plague, especially pneumonic plague and cases in non-endemic areas, are of concern especially so early in the plague season. A recently published paper has shed light on the maintenance of plague on Madagascar: Vogler AJ, Andrianaivoarimanana V, Telfer S, et al: Temporal phylogeography of Yersinia pestis in Madagascar: Insights into the long-term maintenance of plague. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(9): e0005887. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0005887>Abstract:Background----------""_Yersinia pestis_ appears to be maintained in multiple, geographically separate, and phylogenetically distinct subpopulations within the highlands of Madagascar. However, the dynamics of these locally differentiated subpopulations through time are mostly unknown. To address that gap and further inform our understanding of plague epidemiology, we investigated the phylogeography of _Y. pestis_ in Madagascar over an 18 year period.Methodology/Principal findings------------------------------""We generated whole genome sequences for 31 strains and discovered new SNPs that we used in conjunction with previously identified SNPs and variable-number tandem repeats (VNTRs) to genotype 773 Malagasy _Y. pestis_ samples from 1995 to 2012. We mapped the locations where samples were obtained on a fine geographic scale to examine phylogeographic patterns through time. We identified 18 geographically separate and phylogenetically distinct subpopulations that display spatial and temporal stability, persisting in the same locations over a period of almost 2 decades. We found that geographic areas with higher levels of topographical relief are associated with greater levels of phylogenetic diversity and that sampling frequency can vary considerably among subpopulations and from year to year. We also found evidence of various _Y. pestis_ dispersal events, including over long distances, but no evidence that any dispersal events resulted in successful establishment of a transferred genotype in a new location during the examined time period.Conclusions/Significance------------------------""Our analysis suggests that persistent endemic cycles of _Y. pestis_ transmission within local areas are responsible for the long term maintenance of plague in Madagascar, rather than repeated episodes of wide scale epidemic spread. Landscape likely plays a role in maintaining _Y. pestis_ subpopulations in Madagascar, with increased topographical relief associated with increased levels of localized differentiation. Local ecological factors likely affect the dynamics of individual subpopulations and the associated likelihood of observing human plague cases in a given year in a particular location.""Author summary--------------""Plague exists in several geographically separate phylogenetic groups within Madagascar, but little is known about the dynamics of these groups through time. We subtyped 773 Malagasy plague samples and identified 18 phylogenetic groups that showed persistence in the same locations over a period of almost 2 decades. Locations with more topographical relief contained more phylogenetic groups than flatter areas and different phylogenetic groups varied considerably in the number of samples collected each year. Transfers of plague from one location to another definitely occur, but appear to seldom result in the transplanted phylogenetic group becoming successfully established in a new location. Persistent, local transmission cycles are likely responsible for the long term maintenance of plague in Madagascar, rather than repeated wide scale disease transmission events. Landscape likely plays a role in maintaining different phylogenetic groups, with increased topographical relief associated with increased numbers of phylogenetic groups. Local ecological factors likely affect the dynamics of individual subpopulations and the associated likelihood of observing human plague cases in a given year in a particular location."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/181>.]
