News Delaware Government [edited]<http://news.delaware.gov/2017/09/27/dph-announces-delaware-flu-case-likely-related-contact-pigs-county-fair-maryland/>The Delaware Division of Public Health (DPH) announced today [Wed 27 Sep 2017] the state's 1st laboratory-confirmed case of a variant influenza virus (in this instance H3N2v) in a female Sussex County resident under age 18, who had close contact with pigs at a county fair in Maryland. The case is mild and the individual is recovering. No additional information will be released on the individual to protect her privacy.Any individual who visited a Maryland County fair within the last 7 to 10 days, had contact with pigs, and has subsequently developed flu symptoms after their last exposure, should call their medical provider to discuss the potential need for a flu test.When an influenza virus that normally infects pigs is found in people, it is called a ""variant"" influenza virus. While it is not possible to determine exactly where the individual contracted the variant flu, also commonly known as the ""swine flu"", the Maryland Department of Agriculture has been investigating the appearance of this virus in pigs at the fairs in Charles and Frederick Counties. The Delaware resident reportedly had close contact with pigs at the Anne Arundel County Fair, the 1st suspected case of variant influenza from that event. Today [Wed 27 Sep 2017] the Maryland Department of Health announced ""presumptive"" positive cases of variant flu in Maryland residents who had close contact with pigs at the Anne Arundel County Fair as well.Most commonly, human infections with swine flu occur in people who have been exposed to infected pigs (e.g., children handling pigs at agricultural fairs or workers in the swine industry). It is rare for influenza viruses that normally infect pigs to spread to people, but it is possible. Illnesses associated with variant influenza virus infections are usually mild with symptoms similar to those of seasonal flu, including fever and respiratory symptoms, such as sore throat and cough. While rare, limited human-to-human transmission of this variant also has occurred in the past, but has never been widespread or sustained. Such viruses should be taken seriously. The treatment recommendations for this strain of influenza are the same as for seasonal flu.Individuals at higher risk for complications of influenza should consider avoiding exposure to pigs and swine barns, especially where sick pigs have been identified. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend that individuals not at high risk for complications wash hands often with soap and running water before and after exposure to pigs. If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand rub. For additional recommendations visit the CDC website at <https://www.cdc.gov/flu/swineflu/variant/preventspreadfactsheet.htm>.DPH urges all Delawareans 6 months of age and older to get vaccinated from the flu. It is recommended that people get the flu shot to protect themselves from the strains circulating among humans and because it can help reduce the impact of any new strains circulating in animals. While the flu vaccine will not offer protection from the variant types of flu found in animals, it will protect from strains that pass easily from human to human. If someone is not vaccinated, it is possible for a person to get the human strain of influenza flu and subsequently the variant animal flu (or vice versa) at the same time. Two viruses in the same body means a potential recombination of the viruses could occur in that person and a ""new"" virus could be created that can spread more effectively person to person than current strains of the variant flu.In Delaware, DPH is preparing to kick off its flu season activities with 2 free community flu clinics. The 1st will be held [Thu 5 Oct 2017], from 10:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. at the Porter State Service Center, 511 W. 8th St., Wilmington. The 2nd will be a large-scale drive-through flu clinic on [Tue 10 Oct 2017], from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in front of the DelDOT Administration Building on Route 113 South (800 Bay Road), Dover.The flu is easy to transmit from person to person. Since it takes about 2 weeks after vaccination for antibodies that protect against influenza virus infection to develop in the body, Delawareans are encouraged to get vaccinated before influenza begins spreading in their community. Finding a nearby flu clinic or vaccination site is easier than ever before. Visit <flu.Delaware.gov> for a list of DPH clinics or Google ""CDC flu finder,"" enter your zip code, and find nearby sites offering vaccinations.Last flu season, Delaware had over 4500 confirmed flu cases, 15 of which were fatal. The new flu season starts in October [2017].""Flu season officially begins next week [week of Sun 1 Oct 2017] and vaccines are still the best protection. The flu vaccine can either prevent the illness or reduce its severity in humans,"" said DPH Director Dr. Karyl Rattay. ""It is especially important that older Delawareans and those with underlying health conditions get their flu shots early, preferably in October.""Flu symptoms come on suddenly, and include fever, cough, sore throat, runny or stuffy nose, headaches and body aches, and fatigue. Some people get complications including pneumonia, bronchitis, and sinus and ear infections. Providers can prescribe antiviral medicines to make the illness milder, hasten recovery, and prevent serious complications, hospitalizations, and even death.Delawareans can prevent the spread of the flu and other respiratory illness with good hygiene: wash hands often with soap and water, use hand sanitizer with 60 percent alcohol, and cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue or aim for your inner elbow. Stay 6 feet away from others who are coughing or sneezing, and avoid touching your eyes, nose, or mouth. Persons with flu-like illness should stay home from work, school, and other gatherings and not return until free of fever - 100 degrees (37.8 degrees Celcius), without the use of fever-reducing medications for at least 24 hours.If a medical provider suspects they have a patient with the variant flu virus, they should contact the DPH Office of Infectious Disease Epidemiology at 302-744-4990 to coordinate appropriate testing.Swine flu cannot be contracted from eating cooked pork products. Anyone with questions about influenza in swine or other animals should contact the Delaware Department of Agriculture's Poultry and Animal Health Section at 302-698-4500 or 800-282-8685 (Delaware only).A person who is deaf, hard-of-hearing, deaf-blind or speech-disabled can call the DPH phone number above by using TTY services. Dial 7-1-1 or 800-232-5460 to type your conversation to a relay operator, who reads your conversation to a hearing person at DPH. The relay operator types the hearing person's spoken words back to the TTY user. To learn more about TTY availability in Delaware, visit <http://delawarerelay.com>.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Maryland has had several fairs with pigs infected with an influenza virus. It may be unrecognized in the pig or present as a very mild cold in the pig, which may be considered stress of transport, the show, new surroundings, and the dust from bedding.Individuals having any contact with fair animals should wash their hands frequently with soap and water and make liberal use of the hand sanitizer stations all around the fair and show grounds.Attending the fair or show is always fun, but remember, even if you did not touch a pig, other surfaces may still have the virus, so again, frequent hand washing and liberal use of hand sanitizers can help to keep you healthy during and after your visit to the show or fair.ProMED-mail has posted on several of these fairs reporting swine flu. [see: Promed-mail postings <Influenza, swine - USA (09): (MD) agricultural fair 20170927.5340702> and <Influenza, swine - USA (08): (MD) H3N2v 20170923.5335679>]. - Mod.TG]******[2] MarylandDate: Wed 27 Sep 2017Source: Frederick News Post [edited]<https://www.fredericknewspost.com/public/two-confirmed-cases-of-swine-flu-in-humans-at-frederick/article_3f0ba834-b2c3-51c6-a88c-1166e243038a.html>A total of 2 children were brought to Frederick Memorial Hospital this week [week of Sun 24 Sep 2017] with mild cases of swine influenza, a spokeswoman confirmed [Wed 27 Sep 2017].Meanwhile, the state is now investigating to see if the virus among animals has spread from The Great Frederick Fair to farms in the county.The patients visited the emergency room on [Mon 25 Sep 2017] with mild symptoms including fever, congestion and sore throat, according to spokeswoman Kelsey Shupe. The hospital tested the children and confirmed they were sick with H3N2v, the human variant of the H3N2 flu strain confirmed on [Wed 27 Sep 2017] to be found among pigs at The Great Frederick Fair.Both patients' symptoms were mild enough they were never admitted to the hospital, said Dr. Michele Ghim, the director of the Pediatric Emergency Department and Inpatient Unit at FMH. Human-to-human transmission of swine flu is rare, she added, and the H3N2v strain is no more serious or severe than seasonal influenza.""They're very similar,"" Ghim said. ""Knowing you have swine flu doesn't change the symptom management.""While the Maryland Department of Health recommends anyone with flu-like symptoms contact their primary health care provider, Ghim did not recommend residents come to the hospital for treatment. Symptoms can generally be managed at home, she said, and patients at high risk of complications should see their regular physician.Primary care providers are able to coordinate with local health departments and coordinate testing if they suspect a patient has variant flu, according to a news release from the Department of Health. Frederick Memorial Hospital did contact the Department of Health for testing both patients, Shupe said. The disease is generally identified through swabs of a patient's nose and throat, according to the state Department of Health.A combined 5 residents have tested positive in Maryland for swine flu after close contact with pigs at the Anne Arundel County Fair and The Great Frederick Fair, according to a press release from the state Department of Health. All 5 patients were diagnosed with H3N2v.Animal Health closed the swine barns and birthing center at the Frederick Fairgrounds on [Sat 23 Sep 2017], after a pig with a 106-degree temperature -- 4 degrees higher than normal -- was identified by a state inspector.The agency implemented strict measures at the barns to try to keep the virus off exhibitors' farms, but it has since spread.A veterinarian alerted Animal Health on [Mon 25 Sep 2017] night 3 Frederick County farms had pigs, which had been on display at the fair last week [week of Sun 17 Sep 2017], that were now sick, said Maryland State Veterinarian Michael Radebaugh. Officials visited the farms on [Tue 26 Sep 2017] and collected nasal swabs from those pigs for further testing at the state lab in Salisbury, Maryland.The 3 farms have been placed under a hold order and nothing can go on or off the farm, Radebaugh said.At the fairgrounds, 11 pigs from 7 different farms initially tested positive for influenza. Three more pigs -- of the 95 still in quarantine at the fairgrounds -- have since developed a fever, Radebaugh said.Earlier this month [September 2017], 5 pigs at the Charles County Fair were also diagnosed with H3N2. Animal Health is working with laboratories to have genetic tests done on both viruses to see if they are genetically similar and possibly have the same origin, Radebaugh said.""We're trying to put it all together,"" Radebaugh said.As with most flus, only certain groups are at higher risk for complications, including pregnant women, children under 5 and patients who have a compromised immune system.Health officials recommend anyone with flu-like symptoms contact their primary medical provider and inform them if they've had contact with pigs in the last 7 days.Radebaugh also encouraged swine owners to take preventive measures on their farms and report all sick pigs to Animal Health.[Byline: Samantha Hogan and Kate Masters]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This virus is easily spread between pigs, especially in a fair, show or exhibit situation. These animals are hauled in, sometimes from reasonably far distances, and placed in unfamiliar surroundings which have some measure of stress to the animal and its immune system. An airborne virus among swine is easily spread in such a situation. Pigs are also known to multiple the virus very quickly and may exhale, cough or choke out large numbers of virus particles.While we applaud the inspector for shutting things down very quickly, it was surprising other shows continued. Often an animal not doing well in one county can show in a different exhibit, fair or show and do very well, so this would only serve to transport the virus. Hopefully the virus will be contained rapidly without too many people or pigs being affected. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/223>.]
