Albany Times-Union [edited]<http://www.timesunion.com/news/article/Albany-County-sees-increase-in-Hepatitis-A-cases-12240889.php>Albany County recently has seen an increase in hepatitis A cases among men who have sex with other men, according to a county Department of Health public alert. The county has seen 11 cases of hepatitis A since early summer, according to Albany County DOH Commissioner Dr. Elizabeth Whalen. For comparison, there were 4 cases reported in 2016 and 2 in 2015.Hepatitis A is a vaccine-preventable disease with symptoms that include fever, nausea and abdominal pain, followed by a few days of jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eye), county health officials said. Individuals can be vaccinated at most primary care offices as well as the county Department of Health.The virus is transmitted through oral-fecal contact, meaning the germs that cause the illness are found in the stool (feces) of an infected person, and are spread to another person. This occurs when a person touches the stool of an infected person or an object contaminated with the stool of an infected person and ingests the germs. This kind of transmission can occur in any situation in which germs from the feces enter the mouth, including poor hand washing or ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most infections result from close personal contact with an infected household member or sex partner.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This upswing of HAV cases here and elsewhere in the USA seems to parallel the upswing in Europe and parts of Asia as being primarily related to MSMs rather than related to the homeless cohort as occurring currently in California and Michigan. Concern should be given for the significant possibility of HAV starting to spread in MSMs as part of the ongoing outbreaks in southern California and eastern Michigan.Because of specific sexual practices, men who have sex with men (MSM) are known to have a higher risk of acquiring hepatitis A and, if not vaccinated in childhood, should be immunized if found to be anti-HAV negative.The recommendations for HAV vaccination in susceptible adults from the United States' Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP] are to vaccinate any person seeking protection from hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection and people with any of the following indications: - men who have sex with men; - people who use injection or non-injection illicit drugs; - people working with HAV-infected primates or with HAV in a research laboratory setting; - people with chronic liver disease and people who receive clotting factor concentrates; - people traveling to or working in countries that have high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A; and - unvaccinated people who anticipate close personal contact (such as household or regular babysitting) with an international adoptee during the 1st 60 days after arrival in the United States from a country with high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A. The 1st dose of the 2-dose hepatitis A vaccine series should be administered as soon as adoption is planned, ideally 2 or more weeks before the arrival of the adoptee.With the HAV outbreaks occurring in Europe and the USA, concern should also be raised regarding vaccine shortages. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/234>.]
