NBC 10 News [edited]<http://turnto10.com/news/local/ri-dept-of-health-and-dem-issue-warning-over-blue-green-algae-found-in-3-locations>The Rhode Island Department of Health and the state Department of Environmental Management issued a warning [Wed 27 Sep2017] over blue-green algae found in 3 locations.The departments advised the public to avoid contact with 3 bodies of water in the state that can be harmful to health.The 3 locations are Pleasure Lake in Roger Williams Park in Providence, Stafford Pond in Tiverton, and the J.L. Curran Reservoir in Cranston. The state agencies issued the warning because high levels of blue-green algae, also known as cyanobacteria, have been detected in those bodies of water.Contact with water containing blue-green algae can cause irritation of the skin, nose, eyes, or throat. If water containing algal toxins is swallowed, health effects can include stomach ache, diarrhea, vomiting, and nausea. Young children and pets are at greater risk than adults, due to their size and because they are more likely to drink contaminated water. Other health effects, which are rarer, include dizziness, headache, fever, liver damage, and nervous system damage.People who have been swimming in, or have otherwise been in contact with these ponds, who experience symptoms, should contact their health care providers.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[There are a number of very toxic blue-green algae or cyanobacteria. The toxin may be present even if the algae are not, and likewise the algae may be present but the toxin may not be. However, safety for humans and animals means avoiding bodies of water with any blue-green algae.There are a number of blue-green algae, many of which are toxic, frequently resulting in rapid death for animals. Blue-green algae, also known as cyanobacteria, are a group of photosynthetic bacteria that many people refer to as 'pond scum.' Blue-green algae are most often blue-green in color, but can also be blue, green, reddish-purple, or brown. Blue-green algae generally grow in lakes, ponds, and slow-moving streams when the water is warm and enriched with nutrients like phosphorus or nitrogen.Many different species of blue-green algae occur, but the most commonly detected include _Anabaena_ sp, _Aphanizomenon_ sp, _Microcystis_ sp, and _Planktothrix_ sp. It is not always the same species that blooms in a given water body, and the dominant species can change over the course of the season.Typical clinical signs in dogs exposed to blue-green algae include seizures, vomiting, and/or diarrhea after contact with surface water. Although the water appears clear, if a 'bloom' is just starting, it may be difficult to see any sheen, an early indication of blue-green algae formation. Some forms of blue-green algae may start forming slightly below the surface and may not be visible, but are just as toxic.One toxic alga frequently involved in illness and deaths is _Microcystis aeruginosa_, a single-celled blue green alga, or cyanobacterium that occurs naturally in surface waters. Microcystis can proliferate to form dense blooms and mats under certain conditions. Many variants of these cyanobacteria produce multiple toxins, including the potent liver toxin microcystin. When microcystis die, their cells break open, releasing the toxin microcystin into the water. Ingestion of water or algal cells containing microcystin has produced adverse effects in fish, dogs, cats, livestock, and humans. Sometimes the mats and the sheen of the organisms are visible on the surface of the water, if it is a pond. In larger bodies of water, such as large lakes, it may be more difficult or impossible to see the sheen or the mat of accumulation.People swimming in dense microcystis blooms have experienced irritation such as skin rashes, burns, and blistering of the mouth. Ingestion or inhalation of water containing dense bloom material may cause vomiting, nausea, headaches, diarrhea, pneumonia, and fever. Ingestion of significant levels of the toxin microcystin can cause liver damage and dysfunction in humans and animals. No deaths from ingestion of microcystins have been reported in humans in the US; however, Brazil has reported human deaths. Dogs, wildlife, and livestock have died following exposure to this toxin.The most common route of exposure to microcystin is drinking water, followed by recreational exposures and food supplements. Typical water treatment processes do not fully remove microcystin that might be present in drinking water supplies stored in reservoirs. Swimming and playing in water that contains, or recently contained, microcystis blooms is another common exposure route. Children have the highest risk of exposure since they tend to unintentionally ingest water while swimming. Microcystin can move through the aquatic food web, exposing fish and shellfish, as well as the people who consume them. Microcystin does not remain in edible fish and shellfish tissues for more than a few weeks. However, people who frequently consume sport fish caught from a water body that supports microcystis blooms have a higher risk of exposure. Dogs can ingest large amounts of microcystis cells when they clean their coats after playing in water. Livestock, wildlife, and dogs are exposed through drinking water containing microcystis or through ingesting algal mats.A microscopic look at microcystin can be found at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microcystis_aeruginosa> and <https://www.epa.gov/nutrient-policy-data/cyanobacteriacyanotoxins>. The 2nd link also has pictures of how the water looks with this organism.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://oehha.ca.gov/media/downloads/ecotoxicology/fact-sheet/microfactsheet122408.pdf>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/241>.]
