WHO, Health Emergency Information and Risk Assessment [edited]<https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/OWE39-232992017.pdf>Plague - Madagascar - 133 Cases - 24 deaths - CFR 18.3 percent (30 Sep 2017)----------------------------------------------------------------------------The outbreak of plague in Madagascar, which started in August 2017, is ongoing. As of [30 Sep 2017], a total of 73 cases (suspected, probable and confirmed) of pneumonic plague, including 17 deaths (case fatality rate 23.3 percent) have been reported. Of 29 cases in which specimens were collected and submitted to the Institut Pasteur de Madagascar, 19 (66 percent) have been confirmed by either polymerase chain reaction or rapid diagnostic tests. The 73 pneumonic cases are geographically spread across 9 districts, with the capital Antananarivo (27 cases, 7 deaths) being the most affected, followed by the port city of Toamasina (18 cases, 5 deaths), and the rural district of Faratsiho (13 cases, 1 death).Between [1 Aug 2017] and [30 Sep 2017], an additional 58 cases of bubonic plague, including 7 deaths, have been reported throughout the country. 1 case of septicemic plague has also been identified. Collectively, 133 cases and 24 deaths (case fatality rate 18.3 percent) have been reported from 14 central, east and northern districts. The outbreak of plague in Madagascar was detected on [11 Sep 2017] and notified to WHO on [13 Sep 2017].Public health actions---------------------- The Ministry of Public Health is working with WHO to coordinate response to the outbreak, in collaboration with other stakeholders and the communities.- WHO has released USD 300 000 in emergency funds, as well as critical medical supplies, to quickly scale up operational efforts, and is appealing for USD 1.5 million to support the response.- WHO has deployed an emergency response team to provide technical guidance, conduct assessments, support disease surveillance, and engage with communities. Further deployments of WHO staff and response partners in the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) are underway, as well as increased supplies of antibiotics, personal protective equipment and other supplies.- Active case finding, field investigations and contact tracing are ongoing in all the main affected areas. In addition, monitoring of contacts of cases as well as provision of chemoprophylaxis is ongoing.- Information on pneumonic plague has been disseminated to the health professionals to improve case detection and case management.- Awareness campaigns are being conducted through various channels to sensitize people about the disease spread and prevention measures.- Houses of all the identified cases and close contacts in Antananarivo have been sprayed with insecticides.- Recommendations for standard management of dead bodies from all suspected, probable and confirmed plague cases are being put in place.- WHO has deployed an epidemiologist to support the Country Office and the Ministry of Health in response to the outbreak.- Procurement of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) is being done to enhance diagnostic capacity.Situation interpretation------------------------Plague is endemic in Madagascar, especially in the central highlands, where a seasonal upsurge (predominantly the bubonic form) occurs each year, usually between August and September. Although the occurrence of the pneumonic form of the disease during the seasonal surge is usually expected, the current outbreak affecting major urban centers is unusual and concerning. Cases have been reported from 14 different districts, including Toamasina and Antananarivo, an overcrowded city of over 2 million people. These places have highly populated settlements, characterized by rapid and unplanned urbanization with poor living standards. The management and control of an outbreak in such setting is therefore complex and difficult.The current outbreak of pulmonary plague originated in Ankazobe, a known plague endemic area. The initial cases probably developed bubonic plague, which later evolved to secondary pulmonary form due to lack of treatment. This pneumonic form facilitated rapid spread of the disease to several people when the initial case travelled using public transportation. The spread was further aided by the poor management of the dead bodies prior to the declaration of the outbreak. Some of the dead bodies were the subject of rituals, including funeral vigils and transportation over long distances before the final burial.In order to control this outbreak, strategic coordination of response is required at all affected areas. Epidemiologic surveillance and early patient care needs to be well established. Infection prevention and control measures, vector control and disease risk communication to the community are crucial. [Figures regarding: Geographical distribution of plague cases in Madagascar, 23 August - 30 September 2017 and Weekly trend of plague cases in Madagascar, 1 August - 30 September 2017 can be seen at the originally URL. - Mod.LL]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This is early in the plague ""season"" in Madagascar. The number of cases of pneumonic plague and the presence of _Yersinia pestis_ in nonendemic areas is of concern.Plague is caused by the _Yersinia pestis_ bacillus, carried by rat fleas. At the start of the rainy season, currently, rats flee the sewers of Madagascar in massive numbers and take refuge in people's cottages. Care must be taken in any rodent eradication program to ensure that a flea-killing compound is part of the plan. Just as in a natural rodent die-off from _Y. pestis_, the fleas will seek alternate hosts, that is, humans.The following paragraph is from 1998 (Chanteau S, Ratsifasoamanana L, Rasoamanana B, et al: Plague, a reemerging disease in Madagascar. Emerg Infect Dis. 1998;4(1):101-4, PMID: 9452403; <http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/4/1/98-0114_article.htm>)""Between 1930 and 1990, bubonic plague had 'virtually disappeared' on the island due to efficient pest-control and good health management. However since 1990, an annual 200 cases are being reported and bubonic plague takes on epidemic form, especially in the port of Mahajanga, each year. In the capital city of Antananarivo, more cases are also being notified each year since 1990. Madagascar (pop. 13 million) has accounted for 45 percent of all the cases of plague in Africa.""Fatalities related to plague usually are caused by spread of the organism from the bubo (the very painful infected lymph node which drains the area where the flea bite occurred) to the bloodstream. The bacteremia can cause a coagulopathy, producing the purpura seen in the ""black plague"" and also spread to the lungs causing a hemorrhagic pneumonia. It is the pneumonia that can facilitate person-to-person transmission.Madagascar was the location of the isolation of multi-antimicrobial resistant _Y. pestis_ in 1995 (Galimand M, Guiyoule A, Gerbaud G, et al: Multidrug resistance in _Yersinia pestis_ mediated by a transferable plasmid. N Engl J Med. 1997;337(10):677-80, PMID: 9278464; <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199709043371004>). The strain was resistant to chloramphenicol, streptomycin, and tetracycline but sensitive to fluoroquinolones and trimethoprim as well as other aminoglycosides. This was an ominous observation; however, it is not clear whether this naturally occurring strain has persisted or spread. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/181>.]
