Twin Cities Pioneer Press [edited]<http://goo.gl/CpsjU7>Bacteria in food was probably what sickened 137 inmates at the Ramsey County jail recently, according to testing by the Minnesota Department of Health.Early on 9 Sep 2017, people at the jail in St Paul began complaining of stomach pain, diarrhea, and vomiting. Nurses treated inmates at the jail and none had to be hospitalized. The jail notified the Minnesota Department of Health and St Paul-Ramsey County Public Health. State health officials said they tested sample trays of food served for lunch and dinner 8 Sep 2017 and a bacterium called _Clostridium perfringens_ was found in a sample of tamale pie and in rice.""_C. perfringens_ is a common bacterium that lives in the environment and can be a common cause of bacterial intoxication if food is not handled appropriately with respect to time and temperature,"" Amy Saupe, a foodborne-disease epidemiologist, wrote in an email. ""Due to the difficulty of this type of food testing, these results are not sufficient on their own to implicate this food,"" Saupe said. ""However, the identification of _C. perfringens_ in the tamale pie support other investigation findings. Bacterial intoxication, specifically _C. perfringens_ enterotoxin, was the likely cause of the outbreak.""The Ramsey County sheriff's office has a contract with Summit Food Service to provide and serve food at the jail. There were no additional cases reported outside of the Ramsey County jail, according to a Health Department spokesman.""Food safety is our top priority, and we continuously work to ensure our food service operations comply with the standards of our company and our facilities,"" Doug Warner, Summit Food Service spokesman, said in a statement. ""While food has not been conclusively identified as the source of the symptoms at Ramsey County jail, we take these issues very seriously, and have been working closely with the health department and our client.""St Paul-Ramsey County Public Health conducted an environmental health assessment of food service at the jail and still has an active investigation, according to John Siqveland, county spokesman. If there are not changes to the state Health Department's analysis, ""interventions put in place"" by public health staff after the outbreak ""would be sufficient to address any comparable food safety issues and prevent future illness,"" Siqveland said. ""We are monitoring the vendor to ensure compliance and will continue to do so.""[Byline: Mara H Gottfried]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Unlike staphylococcal foodborne illness where the preformed toxin is ingested, in _C. perfringens_ disease the enterotoxin is formed _in situ_ in the gastrointestinal tract. The following discussion was obtained from a previous version of the FDA Bad Bug Book (<https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/FoodborneIllnessContaminants/UCM297627.pdf>):""1. Name of the organism_Clostridium perfringens_ is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming rod. It is widely distributed in the environment and frequently occurs in the intestines of humans and many domestic and feral animals. Spores of the organism persist in soil, sediments, and areas subject to human or animal fecal pollution.2. Nature of acute diseasePerfringens food poisoning is the term used to describe the common foodborne illness caused by _C. perfringens_. A more serious but rare illness is also caused by ingesting food contaminated with type C strains. The latter illness is known as enteritis necroticans or pig-bel disease.3. Nature of diseaseThe common form of _C. perfringens_ poisoning is characterized by intense abdominal cramps and diarrhea, which begin 8-22 hours after consumption of foods containing large numbers of those _C. perfringens_ bacteria capable of producing the food poisoning toxin. The illness is usually over within 24 hours, but less severe symptoms may persist in some individuals for 1-2 weeks. A few deaths have been reported as a result of dehydration and other complications.Necrotic enteritis (pig-bel) caused by _C. perfringens_ is often fatal. This disease also begins as a result of ingesting large numbers of the causative bacteria in contaminated foods. Deaths from necrotic enteritis are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA.Infective dose: The symptoms are caused by ingestion of large numbers (greater than 100 0000 000) vegetative cells. Toxin production in the digestive tract (or in test tubes) is associated with sporulation. This disease is a food infection; only one episode has ever implied the possibility of intoxication (that is, disease from preformed toxin).4. Diagnosis of human illnessPerfringens poisoning is diagnosed by its symptoms and the typical delayed onset of illness. Diagnosis is confirmed by detecting the toxin in the feces of patients. Bacteriological confirmation can also be done by finding exceptionally large numbers of the causative bacteria in implicated foods or in the feces of patients.5. Associated foodsIn most instances, the actual cause of poisoning by _C. perfringens_ is temperature abuse of prepared foods. Small numbers of the organisms are often present after cooking and multiply to food poisoning levels during cool down and storage of prepared foods. Meats, meat products, and gravy are the foods most frequently implicated.6. Relative frequency of diseasePerfringens poisoning is one of the most commonly reported foodborne illnesses in the USA. There were 1162 cases in 1981, in 28 separate outbreaks. At least 10-20 outbreaks have been reported annually in the USA for the past 2 decades. Typically, dozens or even hundreds of persons are affected. It is probable that many outbreaks go unreported because the implicated foods or patient feces are not tested routinely for _C. perfringens_ or its toxin. CDC estimates that about 10 000 actual cases occur annually in the USA.7. Course of disease and complicationsThe disease generally lasts 24 hours. In the elderly or infirm, symptoms may last 1-2 weeks. Complications and/or death only very rarely occur.8. Target populationsInstitutional feeding (such as school cafeterias, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, etc.) where large quantities of food are prepared several hours before serving is the most common circumstance in which perfringens poisoning occurs. The young and elderly are the most frequent victims of perfringens poisoning. Except in the case of pig-bel syndrome, complications are few in persons under 30 years of age. Elderly persons are more likely to experience prolonged or severe symptoms.9. Food analysisStandard bacteriological culturing procedures are used to detect the organism in implicated foods and in feces of patients. Serological assays are used for detecting enterotoxin in the feces of patients and for testing the ability of strains to produce toxin. The procedures take 1-3 days.""The FDA discussion notes that deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA. The following is a paper regarding a case of pig-bel:Gui L, Subramony C, Fratkin J, Hughson MD: Fatal enteritis necroticans (pigbel) in a diabetic adult. Mod Pathol. 2002; 15(1): 66-70; <http://www.nature.com/modpathol/journal/v15/n1/full/3880491a.html>""Abstract---------Enteritis necroticans is a segmental necrotizing infection of the jejunum and ileum caused by _Clostridium perfringens_, type C. The disease occurs sporadically in parts of Asia, Africa, and the South Pacific, where it primarily affects children with severe protein malnutrition. The disease is extremely rare in developed countries, where it has been seen primarily in diabetics. 2 cases have previously been reported in the United States, one in a child with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes. A 66-year-old woman with a 12-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus developed severe abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea after eating a meal of turkey sausage. She died unattended at home. An autopsy showed peritonitis and segmental necrosis of the jejunum and ileum. Microscopic examination showed Gram-positive club-shaped bacilli consistent with Clostridia coating a necrotic mucosa. Products of cpa and cpb genes of _C. perfringens_, type C were identified in the necrotic jejunum by polymerase chain reaction amplification."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9055>.]
