Repubblica Milano [in Italian, machine trans., edited]<http://goo.gl/Xm3j7m>A batch of Bonduelle brand frozen spinach was removed from the market. The decision of the company, which produces the food in question at a Spanish plant in Navarre, came after a warning from the Ministry of Health. ""The product should not be consumed -- reads in the recall -- due to a suspected presence of mandrake leaves.""The withdrawal concerns production batch 15986504-7222 45M63 08:29 whose 750g bags have an expiration date of August 2019.On 30 Sep 2017, an entire family was admitted to the Fatebenefratelli hospital in Milan after eating a pack of frozen spinach bought at the supermarket. A 60-year-old man, a 55-year-old woman, and their children, 18 and 16 years old, ended up at the first aid unit because they showed mental confusion and amnesia of various degrees of severity.The AST [local health authority] analyses have determined that the clinical picture is compatible with contamination of the original product with mandrake, a grass that can invade fields of edible vegetable crops. The leaves of mandrake, thought to be magical in antiquity, are actually poisonous.The company issued a clarification in the evening. ""There is no information -- the statement reads -- that permits the attribution of mandrake leaf contamination of our products."" Bonduelle -- adds the note -- is issuing the recall of some of the product 'Spinaci Millefoglie Bonduelle' as a precautionary measure.""--Communicated by:EpiCore Surveillance Project memberPasquale UrbanoFormerly: Dept of Public Health, University of Florence[As the family was admitted to the first aid unit, we hope they have recovered uneventfully._Mandragora_, often called mandrake, is primarily toxic in the roots and leaves, which contain a variety of alkaloids, especially tropane alkaloids. Some of these alkaloids are known to be anticholinergic, and hallucinogenic. They could produce a hypnotic effect.Most reports of mandrake poisoning are seen because of its tropane alkaloid affect, which is similar to atropine, producing a mydriasis (pupil dilation) causing blurred vision and blushing of the face and body. There may be a dry mouth, vomiting, and tachycardia (rapid heart rate). Hallucinations, dizziness, and headache are also part of the syndrome. There are some reports of difficulty urinating as well as hyperactivity.It would seem difficult to incorporate the roots of the mandrake plant into the spinach, but the leaves could be incorporated into the packages by accident if the spinach fields have been infiltrated with the mandrake plants.The company does not believe their product was contaminated with mandrake but seem to be operating out of caution.This article does not tell us what else the affected individuals may have had to eat. Perhaps the mandrake was mistaken as some other type of greens for the meal. Mandrake and ginger leaves have occasionally been confused, so perhaps the family thought they had ginger leaves.The reality of contamination with the product remains unproven and is likely under investigation. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/10993>.].................................................tg/mj/jh"
