News.am [in Armenian, trans.by an Epicore participant, edited]<https://med.news.am/arm/news/15665/tavushi-marzi-hing-gyuxeri-bnakichnerin-kpatvasten-tularemiayi-dem%E2%80%A4-artavazd-vanyan.html>Residents of 5 Tavush provinces will be immunized against tularemia-------------------------------------------------------------------In total, 25 cases of tularemia infection were recorded in Armenia over the past month, 21 of them are residents of Artsvaberd village of Tavush region, 2 are residents of Kotayk region, and 2 from Yerevan. These last 4 people, as it turned out, visited the village of Artsvaberd. Currently, only 1 of the infected people continues to receive inpatient treatment. There were no severe cases of illness. Artavazd Vanyan, Head of the National Center for Disease Control and Prevention of MoH, said this during the parliamentary hearings in the Standing Committee on Health Care, Maternity and Social Welfare issues.According to him, the first case was clinically detected on [29 Aug 2017]. He was a resident of Yerevan who applied to the Nork infectious hospital. In early August [2017], this person had visited the village of Artsvaberd of Tavush region. The specialists of the Center visited the village and found out that some villagers already had some clinical manifestations of tularemia, and had been locally wrongfully treated for angina.According to Artavazd Vanyan, the investigation has shown that the infection in the village of Artsvaberd occurred from the end of July [2017] to the middle of August [2017]. The causative agent of tularemia was not isolated during the investigation of water and food samples, or from animals. That is, the infection occurred without a clear epizootic. The Center came to the conclusion that the infection could occur by air/dust- borne during haymaking, which is evidence of its forms, oculoglandular and angino-glandular [oroglandular? - Mod.LL], as well as the fact that all the affected lived close to one another.""This is the first time in Armenia when people got sick with tularemia without a clear animal infection, and the first time that the transmission of the pathogen occurred by air/dust,"" Artavazd Vanyan said.He added that the Artsvaberd village is located in the border with Azerbaijan, and Armenian specialists cannot conduct surveys of the entire territory. According to Artavazd Vanyan, Azerbaijan, like Armenia, is an endemic country for tularemia, and, probably, penetration of the animal reservoir took place from that side.Taking into account that the risk of infection continues, the Center decided to vaccinate all residents over 7 years of the village of Artsvaberd and neighboring villages - Chinari, Norashen, Choratan and Aygedzor. Vaccination, in his words, will protect them from tularemia in the next 5 years.Answering the question of Ms. Margarita Yesayan, parliamentarian, about the possibility of deliberate contamination of Armenian territories, Artavazd Vanyan noted that, judging by the fact that there was a local outbreak, and not an epidemic, this seems unlikely.Tularemia is a zoonotic infection in which patients experience intoxication, fever, and lymph node involvement. The causative agent of the disease is _Francisella tularensis_. Some animals, including rabbits, hare and water rats are considered carriers of tularemia bacteria. Infection is transmitted to a person by direct contact with sick animals or through contaminated food and water. There are fewer cases of tularemia infection by aspiration - for example, when processing grain products, threshing bread, and sometimes there are cases of infection through blood-sucking arthropods.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED sincerely thanks the EpiCore members who were able to supply the original citation in Armenian and then translate it into a cogent form. SB and I, using Google Translate, produced a version that was only partly understandable. Any further clarification of the translation would be appreciated.Guessing that angina-glandular likely means oropharyngeal involvement (as angina can refer to a severe sore throat); the presence of these manifestations suggests aerosolization of _F. tularensis_ with infection in the throat and conjunctivae. Contaminated hay or grass when manipulated could have caused infectious aerosols. Water transmission could have occurred but is less likely given oculoglandular involvement unless swimming was involved.A recent report regarding oculoglandular and oropharyngeal tularemia from Turkey is: Eren Gok S, Kocagul Celikbas A, Baykam N, et al: Evaluation of tularemia cases focusing on the oculoglandular form. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2014;8: 1277-1284. doi: 10.3855/jidc.3996. Available at: <https://jidc.org/index.php/journal/article/view/25313604/1168>.Abstract--------""Introduction: Tularemia is a zoonotic disease caused by _Francisella tularensis_. The oculoglandular form is one of the rarest forms. In this study, we evaluated tularemia patients, focusing on the ocular form and the efficacy of early antimicrobial therapy.""Methodology: During a tularemia outbreak, the epidemiological and clinical findings, laboratory assays, and drugs used for the treatment of 48 patients were recorded prospectively. The diagnosis of tularemia was confirmed with microagglutination test (MAT) as well as clinical findings.""Results: The mean age of the subject was 48.6 years; 23 (47.9 percent) of them were female. 36 (81.25 percent) patients had clinical presentation compatible with oropharyngeal tularemia, 7 (14.58 percent) with oculoglandular tularemia, and 2 (4.1 percent) with ulceroglandular tularemia. The most common symptoms were fever (91.6 percent) and sore throat (81.2 percent), and the most common findings were lymphadenopathy (91.6 percent) and tonsillopharyngitis (81.2 percent). In the oculoglandular form, fever, lymphadenopathy, periorbital edema, conjunctival injection, and chemosis were found. The most distinctive ophthalmic feature was follicular conjunctivitis and conjunctival epithelial defects. A total of 45 cases had positive serological results with MAT. All the patients were treated with antimicrobials considered effective against _F. tularensis_, and topical antimicrobial treatment was given to the patients with oculoglandular tularemia. As many as 26 (54.16 percent) patients, who were admitted within 3 weeks of the onset of symptoms, recovered without sequel.""Conclusions: During tularemia outbreaks, ocular involvement should be considered carefully. The early administration of appropriate treatment will be more effective in resolving the infection and preventing complications. Along with systemic antimicrobial therapy, topical treatment will help recovery.""Again, ProMED would much appreciate any other suggestions regarding the translation. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/133>.]
