The San Diego (CA) Union-Tribune [edited]<http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/hepatitis-crisis/sd-me-hepatitis-cdc-20171004-story.html>Paramedics are the newest troops in the fight against San Diego's ever-growing hepatitis A outbreak. A letter signed this week [week of 2 Oct 2017] by the director of the state Emergency Medical Services Authority temporarily expands state laws that govern paramedics, granting them emergency powers to ""vaccinate at-risk populations in response to the outbreak.""Dr Kristi Koenig, director of the San Diego County Emergency Medical Service, requested the temporary scope of practice expansion on 20 Sep 2017 and said Wednesday night, 4 Sep 2017, that she received approval in the mail Tue 3 Sep 2017. Paramedics will be able to deliver hepatitis A doses only under the supervision of nurses and only at special events created to inoculate those who are at high risk of infection, including homeless residents, drug users, and those with liver disease or compromised immune systems.Usually only nurses and doctors are allowed to give the vaccine. ""Paramedics already have basic skills in terms of delivering injections, and this approval allows us to give them extra training to do vaccination but only in very specific settings with very specific oversight,"" Koenig said, adding that they will not be able to administer vaccines during emergency calls. She said getting the state to approve the request took a fair bit of back-and-forth with California regulators. Assemblyman Todd Gloria, D-San Diego, added a letter of his own urging approval on 27 Sep 2017.Gloria said Wednesday evening, 4 Oct 2017, that he believes paramedics can take pressure off public health nurses who have been engaged in a large and growing public vaccination campaign to stop the outbreak, which has now killed 17 people and sickened nearly 500 people throughout the region. He said that these 1st responders can be effective with the homeless and drug-using population that has been disproportionately affected by the outbreak. ""Paramedics are often in communication with this population and, frankly, might be better able to get them to say yes to the vaccine,"" said Gloria, a former city council member. ""This adds hundreds of health care professionals to the vaccination campaign. Having more boots on the ground, so to speak, I think can help us keep this outbreak from spreading any more than it already has.""The campaign, by all counts, continues to gain steam. Last week [week of 25 Sep 2017] public health officials reported that more than 42 000 doses have been administered. During a presentation at the San Diego Convention Center Wednesday afternoon, 4 Oct 2017, that number was bumped up to 54 000 by Dr Eric McDonald, director of the county's Epidemiology and Immunization Services Branch. He delivered that news to a room full of epidemiology experts attending the session of IDWeek, the annual scientific meeting of the Infectious Diseases Society of America which will gather at the San Diego Convention Center through Sun 8 Oct 2017.McDonald and Dr Monique Foster, a Centers for Disease Control epidemiologist who has worked with local health officials, noted that there has been a huge increase in hepatitis A cases nationwide recently. Over the last 15 months, Foster said, 1400 cases have been confirmed, and genetic testing has shown that most of them are caused by a ""1B"" strain of the virus that is uncommon in the USA. During her presentation at the convention center, Foster noted that hepatitis A outbreaks were known to flare every 10 to 15 years. Given that the current vaccine was not added to the nation's childhood vaccination schedule until 2006, the timing of the current surge in cases might be following that old pattern which regularly caused outbreaks with hundreds of cases before a vaccine was available. ""Maybe those cyclic increases still occur, and they're just blunted by the vaccine,"" Foster said.Many in the audience at Wednesday's [4 Oct 2017] talk, who had traveled to San Diego from all over the nation, stood up and asked questions about the outbreak that just happened to be happening in the very city where their conference had already been scheduled. One wanted to know more about the 5 health care workers who had become infected. ""4 of those 5 actually worked in direct patient care where there was a high flow of hepatitis A patients coming in,"" McDonald said, adding that a local physician in primary care is the most recent confirmed health care worker case. Another wondered whether the majority of drug users who have been infected have favored crystal meth or intravenous drugs. McDonald said about half of the drug users were on meth while the rest got their fixes through syringes. That hasn't been the case, he added, in other places where the outbreak has spread. ""In Santa Cruz (County) they're almost all IV drug users,"" McDonald said.The physician also provided a few more details on the only child, a 5-year-old, infected so far. ""It was an un-immunized member of a vaccine-resistant family who got it from a direct family contact,"" McDonald said.[Byline: Paul Sisson]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall******[2] CaliforniaDate: Thu 5 Oct 2017 4:10 PM PDTSource: Los Angeles (CA) Times [edited]<http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-ln-hepatitis-outbreaks-20171006-htmlstory.html>California's outbreak of hepatitis A, already the nation's 2nd largest in the last 20 years, could continue for many more months, even years, health officials said Thu, 5 Oct 2017. At least 568 people have been infected and 17 have died of the virus since November 2016 in San Diego, Santa Cruz, and Los Angeles counties, where local outbreaks have been declared.Dr Monique Foster, a medical epidemiologist with Division of Viral Hepatitis at the CDC, told reporters Thu 5 Oct 2017, that California's outbreak could linger even with the right prevention efforts. ""It's not unusual for them to last quite some time, usually over a year, 1 to 2 years,"" Foster said. That forecast has worried health officials across the state, even in regions where there haven't yet been cases.Many are beginning to offer vaccines to their homeless populations, which are considered most at risk. Doctors know that people with hepatitis A, who may not even have symptoms, could travel and unknowingly infect people in a new region, creating more outbreaks.San Diego, Santa Cruz, and Los Angeles--------------------------------------481 cases in San Diego County70 cases in Santa Cruz County12 cases in Los Angeles County5 cases elsewhere in the stateSan Diego County declared a public health emergency in September 2016 because of its hepatitis A outbreak. Since November, 481 people there have been infected, including 17 who died, according to the county's health department.The only outbreak in the last 20 years bigger than California's occurred in Pennsylvania in 2003, when more than 900 people were infected after eating contaminated green onions at a restaurant.The hepatitis A virus, which causes liver damage, took root in San Diego's homeless community. It is transmitted from feces to mouth, so unsanitary conditions make it more likely to spread. A common way for the virus to be transmitted is when an infected person uses the bathroom and doesn't wash his hands, experts say. San Diego's outbreak then spread to Santa Cruz County, where 70 people have been infected so far, said county public health manager Jessica Randolph. There are typically one or two hepatitis A cases in the county each year.Randolph said Santa Cruz County has distributed 1381 doses of the vaccine so far, and plan to continue the effort.""I don't think the worst is over,"" Randolph said.Health workers in Los Angeles are also trying to vaccinate the region's massive homeless population after an outbreak was declared in the county last month. So far, 12 people have been infected, most of whom were either in San Diego or Santa Cruz when they were exposed.San Francisco health officials said Wednesday they were stepping up their vaccination efforts in light of the growing outbreaks statewide. So far, there have been 13 hepatitis A cases in the city, but none associated with the outbreak. Tenderloin Health Services, a clinic in the San Francisco neighborhood known for its a large homeless population, has been offering hepatitis A vaccines to its patients for weeks. The clinic recently began holding special vaccination events and delivered 80 injections in 3 hours Fri 29 Sep 2017, said Dr Andrew Desruisseau, the clinic's medical director. ""The cases in San Diego and the magnitude of the epidemic there certainly set off alarms in the Bay Area,"" he said. Desruisseau said 90 percent of the clinic's patients are homeless and many also have other liver problems or are drug users, making the disease especially dangerous.The typical mortality rate from hepatitis A is 1 percent, but the disease appears to have killed a higher rate of people in San Diego county because of the population it hit, many of whom already had weakened livers from hepatitis B or C. All 17 people who have died in the San Diego outbreak had underlying health conditions, including 16 who had liver problems.Desruisseau said he was concerned about conditions in the city that could help the spread the disease. ""With all of the housing crisis and gentrification in San Francisco, we're seeing a much more condensed homeless population,"" he said. ""We have a lot of obstacles in keeping it a very sanitary place for our clients.""[Byline: Soumya Karlamangla]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>. A county map can be seen at <http://geology.com/county-map/california-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]******[3] UtahDate: Mon 2 Oct 2017Source: Utah Department of Health, Bureau of Epidemiology [edited]<http://health.utah.gov/epi/diseases/hepatitisA/HAVoutbreak_2017>Since 1 Jan 2017, Utah public health has identified 44 confirmed cases of hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection; many among persons who are homeless and/or using illicit drugs. Several cases have been linked by investigation and/or viral sequencing to a national outbreak of hepatitis A involving cases in California and Arizona. Hospitalization rates of less than 40 percent have been described in previous hepatitis A outbreaks; however, other jurisdictions associated with this outbreak are reporting case hospitalization rates approaching 70 percent. The high rate of hospitalization may be a result of cases having underlying illnesses (such as, alcoholism), or a higher rate of hepatitis comorbidities (such as, hepatitis B or C). In response to the outbreak, public health officials have been working to identify cases and contacts, provide education, and ensure opportunities for vaccination of close contacts to cases and vulnerable populations.Outbreak associated cases: 36Onset date range: 8 May-26 Sep 2017Age range: 23-69 years median age 41 yearsSex: female 15 (41.7 percent), male 21 (58.3 percent)Health jurisdictionsSalt Lake county 27 (75 percent)Utah county 3 (8.3 percent)Bear River 4 (11.1 percent)Central 1 (2.8 percent)Southwest Utah 1 (2.8 percent)Hospitalization: 22 (61.1 percent)Deaths: 0 (0 percent)Risk factorsHomelessness and drug use: 17 (47.2 percent)Drug use: 24 (66.7 percent)Homelessness: 20 (55.6 percent)Epi-Linked: 3 (8.3 percent)Travel: 3 (8.3 percent)Unknown: 4 (11.1 percent)--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The state of Utah can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at < http://healthmap.org/promed/p/246>. A county map can be seen at <http://geology.com/county-map/utah-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]******[4] HAV stabilityDate: Thu 5 Oct 2017From: Blaine Hollingsworth <Blaineh@bcm.edu> [edited][re: ProMED-mail Hepatitis A - USA (39): (CA, AZ) 20171004.5355999]-------------------------------------------------------------------In the byline by Paul Sisson [item 3] a statement was made that states the following: ""Proper hand hygiene, washing with soap and warm water for at least 20 seconds after using the bathroom, is sufficient to kill the virus."" While there is no debate about the recommendation for proper hand hygiene for its dilutional effect, it will not ""kill the virus.""As we report in the authoritative textbook, Fields Virology, HAV is a very stable virus. It retains most of its infectivity when subjected to pH 1.0 for 2 hours at room temperature and is still infectious after 5 hours. Incubation of the virus of a surface for at least 4 weeks at room temperature results in only a 100-fold decrease in infectivity. Significant loss of infectivity starts to occur with exposure at 60 deg C [140 deg F] for short periods and infectivity is destroyed almost instantaneously by heating above 85 deg C [185 deg F] at neutral pH. HAV has been found to survive for days to months in experimentally contaminated fresh water, seawater, wastewater, soils, marine sediment, live oysters, and cream-filled cookies.Outbreaks of hepatitis have been reported following ingestion of partially cooked bivalve mollusks suggesting that even steaming may be insufficient to destroy the virus in this food source. HAV infectivity is highly resistant to drying, and infectious virus has been recovered from acetone-fixed cell sheets. The virus is also highly resistant to solvent detergents, surviving a 1 percent concentration of sodium dodecyl sulfate, as well as to organic solvents such as ether and chloroform. These properties of the virus are likely to contribute significantly to its ability to spread through the environment and to cause common-source outbreaks of hepatitis. Appropriate measures of inactivation include autoclaving (121 deg C [about 250 deg F] for 20 minutes), exposure to chlorine-containing compounds (sodium hypochlorite or bleach, 3-10 mg/L at 20 deg C [68 deg F] for 5-15 minutes or to free residual chlorine concentrations of 2-2.5 mg/L for 15 minutes, or to a quaternary ammonium formulation containing 23 percent HCl [toilet bowl cleaner - Mod.LL]. HAV is also inactivated by incubation in 3 percent formaldehyde for 5 minutes or in 70 percent ethanol for 60 minutes and by UV irradiation.--F Blaine Hollinger, MDProfessor of Medicine, Molecular Virology & EpidemiologyDirector, Eugene B Casey Hepatitis Research CenterBaylor College of MedicineHouston, TXUSA<Blaineh@bcm.edu>[It is always an honor to receive comments from Dr Hollinger, a long time leader in viral hepatitis research. - Mod.LL]
