KRNV [edited]<http://mynews4.com/news/local/unusually-high-number-of-viral-meningitis-cases-reported-in-washoe-county>Washoe County Health officials report they are concerned about a higher than usual number of viral meningitis cases in 2017. Officials say over 30 cases have been reported in Washoe County so far in 2017, with 27 reported since 15 Jul 2017. Patients have ranged in age from one to 81-years-old, and the median average is 13-years-old.Meningitis is a rare disease that causes inflammation of the protective membranes covering the brain and spinal cord usually due to a bacterial or viral infection. While some types of meningitis can be fatal, viral meningitis is [so at least generally is - Mod.LL] the least dangerous type of meningitis. It is also the most common. There are no vaccines and those who get the disease often recover on their own within 7-10 days, but officials say they are continuing to monitor the patientsëã progress, and it is still important for anyone experiencing symptoms to see a healthcare provider right away. Babies younger than one-month-old and those with weakened immune systems are more likely to experience serious symptoms from the disease.Dr. Randall Todd, the Director of Washoe County Health District's Epidemiology Division, says that most of the cases reported were hospitalized for about 2 days and have since recovered.The Health District and the CDC are working to learn if the outbreak is associated with an outbreak in Susanville, California that prompted the closure of Lassen High School and Lassen Community College. Laboratory tests are underway to determine if there is a link between the 2 outbreaks.The disease can be contracted by close contact, such as touching or shaking hands with an infected person; touching objects, surfaces, or dirty diapers that have the virus on them and then touching your eyes, nose, or mouth; or drinking water with the virus in it. You can prevent the disease by washing your hands often especially after changing diapers, using the toilet, coughing, or blowing your nose. Avoid touching your face with unwashed hands and avoid close contact such as kissing, touching, or sharing cups with people who are ill. The health district also recommends simply staying home when you are ill.Surfaces that may be contaminated can be disinfected using a bleach solution (1/2 cup [120 mL] of bleach to one gallon [3.785 L] of water.) Areas that should consider deep cleaning include households with anyone recently diagnosed with viral meningitis, community sports clubs, daycare facilities, group home daycare, public museums, playgrounds, or any other facilities that host activities for children, such as churches.Despite most of the cases being reported in students, Washoe County Schools say at this point they are not planning on closing schools because no single school has more than 2 cases.[Byline: Jaclyn Shearer]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] California (Lassen County)Date: Tue 3 Oct 2017Source: KOLO [edited<http://www.kolotv.com/content/news/Susanville-schools-closed-because-of-meningitis-cases-448516563.html>Lassen High School and Lassen Community College in Susanville, CA, are back open after being closed through 29 Sep 2017 after Lassen County's Public Health Department confirmed viral meningitis in Lassen County. A total of 14 cases have been clinically diagnosed, 9 of them lab-confirmed, of 43 total possible cases in Lassen County.According to a Public Health release, the department is working with medical providers to ensure prompt identification and reporting of patients with signs and symptoms of viral meningitis. Lassen Health says the investigation began with the high school football team, but is not further identifying anyone whose symptoms are being tested.According to the release, viral meningitis is an inflammation of the tissue that covers the brain and spinal cord that is caused by a virus. It is typically less severe than bacterial meningitis, and most people recover on their own within 7 to 10 days. Viral meningitis cannot be treated with antimicrobials, and there is no need for contacts of cases to receive preventive antimicrobials. Although clusters of cases of viral meningitis are not common, they do occur.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It would not be surprising if the agent or agents causing these clusters are the same. The areas are only about 100 miles [161 km] away as the crow flies.Meningitis refers to the inflammation of the meninges, the tissues that surround the brain and spinal cord, and implies lack of specific brain and spinal cord involvement (called encephalitis and myelitis, respectively, although some involvement may be present). In viral meningitis, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is usually visibly clear, but on laboratory examination the CSF white cell count is 6 to 500 cells per cmm, usually with lymphocytes predominating. Usually the CSF glucose level is normal (as compared to bacterial meningitis where it is low) and the CSF protein level is mildly elevated (where in bacterial meningitis it is significantly elevated). As noted, the symptoms of viral meningitis usually last from 7 to 10 days, and the patient recovers completely.The non-polio enteroviruses are the most common causes of viral meningitis, especially during the summer and fall months. However, other causes of viral meningitis include mumps, lymphocytic choriomeningitis viruses, arboviruses, HIV, herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2. Non-infectious causes include certain drugs, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and systemic diseases, such as lupus, sarcoidosis, and metastatic cancer.Most people who get infected with enteroviruses are asymptomatic or have only a non-specific febrile illness. Enteroviruses are most often spread via the fecal-oral route from person to person, through fecal contamination of water or food, or contact with contaminated inanimate objects. Enteroviruses can also be spread through the respiratory secretions (saliva, sputum, or nasal mucus) of an infected person.Recently introduced CSF gene screens for viral meningitis/encephalitis can be quite useful in making a specific diagnosis. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3549>, <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/14040>.]
