Repubblica [machine transl, edited]<http://torino.repubblica.it/cronaca/2017/10/08/news/bambina_non_vaccinata_forse_colpita_da_tetano_e_in_rianimazione_a_torino-177673625/?ref=fbpr>A 7-year-old Italian girl has contracted tetanus, a disease for which she had never been vaccinated. The little girl was accompanied by her parents yesterday afternoon [Sat 7 Oct 2017] at the hospital at Queen Margherita, with convulsion and uncontrolled spasms. She is now being admitted to the resuscitation department, waiting for another medical team to find out the origin of those symptoms by dissolving the last doubts as to the girl being affected by tetanus. Regina Margherita's doctors have already established that the girl had never been vaccinated for that illness, one of the mandatory ones with polio, diphtheria and hepatitis B, even before the Lorenzin decree came into force, raising the number of compulsory vaccines for children.Pending the findings from the blood samples that have been sent, doctors have immediately started the treatment against the toxin that is produced by the bacterium that causes tetanus. The child is breathing on her own but is kept sedated to avoid spasms and complications: tetanus can in fact cause neurological damage. The prognosis remains unclear but the condition of the child almost 24 hours after hospitalization appears to be slowly improving. ""The prognosis cannot be accessed, but the child responds to the treatment and no aggressive treatment has been necessary,"" explains Giorgio Ivani, the primary resuscitation.If the conditions of the 7-year-old girl were aggravated overnight, doctors would adopt another approach. The hospital sent a report to the ministry shortly after the child's admission was never vaccinated for tetanus. ""Pediatric cases of tetanus are very rare,"" says Vittorio Demicheli, regional director and epidemiologist.In the last 10 years, cases of tetanus in children under the age of 4 have only been 2. There is a bigger incidence among very old people born before the vaccine became mandatory, about 4 or 5 cases a year. ""Mortality is between 30 and 50 percent. ""Tetanus toxoid is one of the mandatory vaccines from the 1st year of birth,"" concludes Demicheli.[Byline: Carlotta Rocco]--Communicated by:Pasquale UrbanoFormerly Dept of Public Health, University of Florence.<Pasquale.urbano@unifi.it>[ProMED thanks Dr. Urbano for this posting.This case is reported to be the second case of tetanus in a child in Italy in 2017 [see ProMED post 20170629.5139890 for the first case - Mod.JH]. Nothing is mentioned regarding recent trauma. The following paper discusses adult cases of tetanus in the county occurring in the period between 2001 and 2010:Filia A, Bella A, von Hunolstein C, et al: Tetanus in Italy 2001-2010: a continuing threat in older adults. Vaccine. 2014;32: 639-644.Abstract:""Despite being a completely preventable disease, tetanus cases continue to occur in Italy and notification and hospitalization rates have been reported to be higher with respect to European and other industrialized countries. We examined statutory notification, hospitalization, mortality and seroprevalence data to describe tetanus epidemiology in Italy from 2001 to 2010. A total of 594 tetanus cases were notified, with an average annual incidence of 1.0/1 000 000 population. Most cases were unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated. Up to 80 percent of cases occurred in subjects aged greater than 64 years and a higher proportion of females with respect to males were reported in this age group. The annual number of hospital admissions was 1.4-1.7 times greater than the number of notifications in the same year. The mean annual number of reported deaths was 21. Seroprevalence data show progressively higher susceptibility levels with increasing age. Over 50 percent of persons aged 45-64 years and over two thirds of subjects greater than or equal to 65 years had tetanus antibody levels less than 0.01 IU/ml. Results show that tetanus is a continuing problem in Italy and, as in other countries, most cases occur in older adults, especially elderly women. The observed differences in notification and hospitalization rates suggest underreporting by physicians. In recent years, Italy has accounted for most cases reported annually in the European Union (EU) but different case definitions are used. In Italy, a confirmed case is one that meets the clinical case definition while the EU case definition classifies confirmed cases as those with laboratory confirmation of disease. The incidence of clinical tetanus in Italy is 10-fold higher than in other industrialized countries, like Australia and Canada, likely due to higher susceptibility levels in Italy. In view of the low prevalence of tetanus antibodies in adults greater or equal to 45 years [of age], strategies to improve vaccine uptake in this population group need to be implemented.""Tetanus is a potentially fatal disease characterized by skeletal muscle rigidity and painful convulsive spasms, which are caused by a potent neurotoxin, tetanospasmin, produced by the vegetative form of _Clostridium tetani_, an anaerobic spore-forming Gram-positive bacillus. _C. tetani_ is a member of the normal intestinal flora of animals, including humans. Tetanus usually occurs following contamination of wounds by soil or animal feces in which the spores of _C. tetani_ can be found.Tetanus may follow surgical procedures, burns, deep puncture wounds, crush wounds, otitis media, dental infection, animal bites, abortion and pregnancy. The presence of necrotic tissue and/or foreign bodies increases risk for tetanus because they favor growth of _C. tetani_. Tetanus can also follow injection of contaminated illicit drugs.Neonatal tetanus occurs usually in developing countries in infants with infection of the umbilical stump who are born to a non-immune mother. Infants of actively immunized mothers acquire passive immunity that protects them from neonatal tetanus. Tetanus is not directly transmitted from person to person.Tetanus occurs in people who are inadequately immunized, i.e., people who have not completed the primary series and received appropriate boosters. Recovery from tetanus is not necessarily associated with immunity, and primary immunization is indicated after recovery from tetanus.A discussion of wound management and treatment of tetanus can be found at: <http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/downloads/tetanus.pdf>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9247>.]
