European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) [edited]<https://ecdc.europa.eu/sites/portal/files/documents/Plague-Madagascar-Oct-2017.pdf>[The entire document and the references can be found at the source URL above. - Mod.LL]Rapid risk assessment: outbreak of plague in Madagascar, 2017----------------------------------------------------------------------- The likelihood of spread and the public health impact of the plague outbreak in Madagascar:Madagascar is experiencing an outbreak of plague including the pneumonic forms. While the number of cases in this outbreak is consistent with what has been observed in previous years, the unusually high proportion of pneumonic forms (64 percent) is of concern [13,14]. Pneumonic plague is prone to spread in densely populated urban areas in the case of very close contact with a symptomatic case. Controlling the outbreak will depend on the ability of Madagascar to ensure rapid early detection and isolation of cases, their treatment using appropriate infection control measures, comprehensive contact tracing for post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP), and infection prevention and control measures. In contrast, the provision of care by traditional healers, the unsafe burial practices, and the limited application of infection control in healthcare settings may amplify the transmission as previously observed in Madagascar [14,23,24]. The outbreak currently involves several uncontrolled chains of transmission of pneumonic plague and the situation remains unclear at this stage. The infection and death of a foreign visitor to the country without a known source of transmission is of concern. The likelihood of further spread of the outbreak in Madagascar is considered high until the prevention and control activities implemented by the national authorities with the support of the WHO and international partners allow the outbreak to be controlled in the affected districts [23,24]. According to WHO and as of 2 Oct 2017, the overall risk at the national level is high [24].- The likelihood of spread to neighboring countries, including the EU outermost regions [EU OMRs]:The short incubation period of pneumonic plague and the fact that Madagascar is an island limits the risk of spread in the region to incubating visitors travelling by air. Antananarivo is connected to neighboring islands in the Indian Ocean, including Mayotte and La R̩union (EU OMRs), as well as the capital cities of eastern and southern African countries. No importation of infectious cases of plague to La R̩union and Mayotte has occurred in the past 10 years. The fact that a foreign visitor developed pneumonic plague in Madagascar before returning to his home country underlines the fact that an incubating traveler may develop symptoms during a flight and upon return in his/her home country. There is no indication that contacts of the foreign pneumonic case have developed symptoms and they are likely to have received prophylactic antimicrobial treatment decreasing the risk of further spread and exportation. The likelihood of spread of plague at the regional level will depend on the intensity of transmission, mainly in the capital city. The regional risk is assessed by WHO as moderate due to frequent flights to neighboring Indian Ocean islands [24].- The risk for EU citizens residing in or travelling to the affected areas in Madagascar:According to the Madagascar tourist office, 293 000 tourists visited Madagascar in 2016. The most popular months were October, November, and December with around 40 000 visitors each month [30]. In 2016, around 137 000 travelers from 23 EU countries travelled to Madagascar by air, of which 75 percent originated from continental France. The peak travel months were July, August, and October. In addition, there are daily flights to La R̩union and Mayotte, the EU OMRs in the Indian Ocean. Madagascar is also a popular destination for cruises. The probability of contracting plague in the affected areas in Madagascar is considered to be very low for EU travelers and would most likely result from a direct close contact with a case of pneumonic plague. The probability of importation to the EU through an incubating traveler arriving from Madagascar is considered very low. This probability would be slightly higher among people in the EU or OMRs returning home in Madagascar to visit friends and relatives (VFRs). The Malagasy community in France is estimated at between 100 000 to 140 000 residents mainly in the Ile-de-France region around Paris. The risk of international spread of plague appears very low according to WHO travel advice based on the available information as of 2 Oct 2017[24]. ECDC is closely following the situation, and the level of risk will be reassessed in light of further available information about the outbreak and the occurrence of multiple foci of transmission within the capital city, Antananarivo.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall******[2] Alleged exhumationsDate: Sat 7 Oct 2017 7:34 EATSource: L'Express Madagascar [in French, machine trans., edited]<http://www.lexpressmada.com/blog/actualites/epidemie-des-cadavres-de-pestiferes-voles/>The lifeless body of a person who died in Amboditsiry, Antananarivo, following a suspected pneumonic plague outbreak on Wed 4 Oct 2017, could not be buried in the common grave of Anjanahary [Antananarivo], as stated by an official of the Municipal Bureau of Health (BMH). His family took the body, on the sly, to the district of Manjakandriana [Analamanga region], north east of the capital, where the family tomb stands. The official refused to admit if his relatives succumbed to the plague. ""We were faced with people who were ready to kill, if anyone touched the body, we were still around to try to negotiate. Unfortunately, they found an underground path to escape. They would have taken him to their family tomb,"" a source said 6 Oct 2017.In the district of Toamasina I, the corpse of a person with plague already buried in the cemetery of Manangareza disappeared from the mass grave. His family would have dug it up to move it in his family grave. The police of Toamasina I was alerted yesterday, 6 Oct 2017. ""We do not know which of the 2 bodies of the plague victims, buried in this cemetery was stolen. The teams of the Ministry of Public Health and gendarmerie went downstairs this day (yesterday [6 Oct 2017]) to find out,"" a source told the Toamasina gendarmerie.Doctors say that there is risk of the bacteria spreading. ""The germ lives in the grave. The tombs were those who died of plague are buried are required to be sealed for years. Otherwise, the bacteria will continue to spread and affect the living,"" says a doctor.Just yesterday, 6 Oct 2017, a boy, invited to a ceremony in the exhumation in Avaradrano district [Toamasina], in just a few days, tested positive for the pneumonic plague in a clinic in Antananarivo city. ""He surely contracted this illness during this event because he did not go anywhere else,"" said the grandmother, worried about the health of her grandson. He is undergoing treatment at a large hospital in Antananarivo city since 6 Oct 2017. In addition, 10 days ago, a girl living in Soavimasoandro [Antananarivo], who attended an exhumation in Fianarantsoa, is suspected of having died of plague.Doctors noticed the coincidence between the period of exhumation and the plague season. ""All must be vigilant, especially, doctors. Sometimes the family of the deceased conceals certain information during the interrogation, if the death occurred outside the health facility,"" says another doctor. Active research of all persons coming into contact with these bodies is now underway, indicated a source with the Ministry of Public Health. With the slightest mistake or negligence, the plague epidemic will continue to rage.[Byline: Miangaly Ralitera]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The following piece by C Claiborne Ray addresses the possibility of plague transmission from the dead (<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/19/science/can-you-contract-plague-from-a-corpse.html>):""Can you contract plague from a corpse?---------------------------------------Q. If long-ago victims of the bubonic plague are dug up, could the germs infect someone?A. The body of a person who died from plague would not transmit the disease to another person unless that person had been in contact with lymph nodes, respiratory tissues, or bodily secretions soon after the death or had encountered a body that was frozen and then thawed, said Dr Roy M Gulick, chief of infectious disease at New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center. Neither sequence of events seems likely, Dr Gulick said, adding that fleas from plague-infected rodents in the area would be much more suspect.Bubonic plague, one form of a chiefly flea-spread disease caused by the bacterium _Yersinia pestis_, is only rarely spread from person to person among the living, and any disease-causing organisms in an infected person who dies usually decompose quickly, Dr Gulick said.Bubonic plague is not directly transmitted from one human to another unless there is direct contact with lymph node tissue or secretions, he said. However, the pneumonic and septicemic forms of the plague can be transmitted through infected droplets in the air.""In the Middle Ages,"" Dr Gulick said, ""corpses of people who died of plague were used as biological weapons by catapulting them into walled cities."" The disease did spread to townspeople (and catapulters), he said, but it is not clear whether it was spread by bodily secretions or infected fleas.""It is conceivable that aerosolization of infected secretions could occur in exhumation or reburial procedures, especially is there is manipulation of the oral cavity, but it is not clear how frequently, this occurs. In the ECDC risk assessment above, ""unsafe"" burial practices is mentioned but not elaborated on. - Mod.LL]******[3] Seychelles: airline suspensionDate: Sat 7 Oct 2017Source: Madagascar Tribune [in French, machine trans., edited]<http://www.madagascar-tribune.com/Air-Seychelles-suspend-ses-vols,23339.html>""Following the advice and at the request of the Authority of Public Health of Seychelles on the concerns of the plague in Madagascar, Air Seychelles will suspend temporarily its services between Seychelles and Madagascar from Sun 8 Oct 2017."" Such is the content of Air Seychelles official release. It was felt that the Seychelles authorities acted in relation to the death of the Seychellois basketball coach in Madagascar from pulmonary plague he contracted locally during the basketball tournament in Antananarivo. Only after the unfortunate death that Malagasy authorities have taken action and initiated a background awareness campaign.The representative of WHO in Madagascar Ndiaye Charlotte said at the press conference with the Ministry of Health that, ""currently, there are no restrictions on Madagascar."" It emphasized the word ""currently"". This means that this situation may change related to the epidemic. The 1st ""penalty"" has been marked; it remains to be seen whether Air Seychelles will take further measures. The number of people affected/suspected of plague continues to increase, along with the number of deceased persons.[Byline: Yvan Andriamanga]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The death of the basketball coach seemed to be behind the suspension of the 1000 mile, 2 hour flights. It is not known if the coach was ill while on the flight or if symptoms begun after arriving in Seychelles. Indeed, the ECDC report above states that the coach died in Madagascar and not in Seychelles. As the number of cases increases, especially in urban areas with airports, additional risk for international spread will exist over the cases so far, in Seychelles (possibly) and South Africa (apparently). No details about the South Africa case have come forward.Date / Cases / Deaths14 Sep 2017 / 28 / 530 Sep 2017 / 73 / 173 Oct 2017 / 194 / 305 Oct 2017 / 258 / 367 Oct 2017 / 343 / 42- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/181>.]
