San Diego Union-Tribune [edited]<http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/hepatitis-crisis/sd-me-hepatitis-prevention-20171006-story.html>Experts say San Diego followed all the right steps in addressing what is now one of the largest hepatitis A outbreaks the country has seen in decades, but variables unique to the city's situation contributed to the outbreak. At least 481 people have been infected and 17 have died of the infection since November [2016] in San Diego. Another 88 cases have been identified in Santa Cruz and Los Angeles counties, where local hepatitis A outbreaks have been declared. Officials throughout the state are now scrambling to vaccinate homeless populations, which are considered the most at risk. Doctors say people who have already been infected could travel and unknowingly spread it elsewhere.Dr. Janet Haas, president-elect of the Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, said the outbreak is unusual for the USA because the spread of the liver infection has been attributed to a lack of basic hygiene and sanitation, not contaminated food. This means public health officials can't solely rely on previous containment methods.""It's not like there's never been a hepatitis A outbreak [like this one - Mod.LL] before...we know what's worked in the past. Usually that contains it and the story ends,"" Haas said. ""But sometimes it doesn't work, or circumstances are different and you have to ramp it up.""In San Diego, where nearly 85 percent of all confirmed cases are located, cleaning crews are hitting the streets, shooting high-pressure water mixed with bleach in an effort to sanitize any feces, blood, bodily fluids or contaminated surfaces. A private company was hired in September 2017 to deliver portable hand-washing stations in locations where homeless residents tend to congregate. Despite these efforts, the disease is spreading and many are asking what could have been done and what will effectively prevent future transmission.According to Dr. Monique Foster of the CDC's division of viral hepatitis -- in San Diego this past week for a national infectious disease conference -- there is no national standard that outlines how every public agency should respond. ""You can't have a checklist that says 'do x, y and z,' because no outbreak is the same,"" Foster said following an impromptu session at the conference about San Diego's outbreak. ""The type of illness, the group of people it's affecting and how it's being spread are all factors that will impact how a government should respond and when the public should be notified.""For example, San Diego's problem looks similar to a hepatitis A outbreak in Michigan, where state health officials have confirmed at least 341 cases [now 376 - Mod.LL] since August [2016]. Of those, 268 [now 303 - Mod.LL] people have been hospitalized and 14 died [although the epidemiology of the affected cohort is more drug users and less homeless and the virus is genetically different from the CA cases. - Mod.LL].But Michigan and San Diego have different resources, Foster said. The underlying populations being affected are different and the laws in both areas are different. ""This is why the CDC assists. We connect them with people who have answers, but we don't come in and take over,"" Foster said. ""The local governments and local health departments are the 1st in line because they know their needs better than we do.""The California Code of Regulations outlines reporting procedures for hepatitis A cases among a specific class of people, including day care workers, health care facilities and food handlers who are more likely to spread the liver disease to other people. County health officials have been hesitant to release any additional information about where the cases are specifically concentrated, citing state and federal health privacy laws.""This information is gathered from confidential medical interviews and documents,"" Eric McDonald, director of the county's epidemiology and immunization services branch, said after presenting with Foster at the infectious disease conference. ""The public's need to know has to override the confidentiality of the infected individuals.""According to Dr. Oscar Alleyne, senior public health adviser to the National Association of County and City Health Officials, the Control of Communicable Diseases Manual is often referred to as the ""bible"" among health officials. The American Public Health Association lists the book, which is now in its 20th edition, as a ""must-have sourcebook on identifying and controlling infectious diseases."" Alleyne said it's the closest thing to a guidebook public officials have and has been an industry standard reference for more than 100 years.According to the manual, prevention is key for hepatitis A, since the vaccine provides lifelong immunity. Data show since being added in 2006 to the recommended list of vaccinations for young children, the number of hepatitis A cases in the USA has decreased by 95 percent. Officials are instructed to control patients confirmed to have hepatitis A and quickly vaccinate those in immediate contact with infected individuals to increase the likelihood that the vaccine will be effective.County epidemiologists identified the rash of hepatitis A cases in early March 2017, and dated the infection to the previous November 2016. From the outset, the priorities have been vaccination and education, in line with manual instructions. It's easier said than done. ""The normal method for preventing other people from getting sick gets thrown out the door when the community it's infecting lives outside,"" Alleyne said. ""You have to know where they went, who they came in contact with...the likelihood of being able to capture everyone on that list is small.""In the event of an outbreak, public health officials should 1st determine how hepatitis is being spread, vaccinate the at-risk community and make special efforts to improve sanitary and hygienic practices to eliminate fecal contamination, the manual says. By early summer [2017] the official focus shifted to sanitation; handwashing and street cleaning.According to Dr. Jeffrey Engel, executive director of the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, that might not be enough. ""I can tell you that washing the door knobs is not going to do it,"" Engel said. ""This is more about human behavior than anything else.""Hepatitis A is more commonly transmitted through contaminated food. In 2003, 935 people in multiple states were infected by eating contaminated green onions at a restaurant. It was the largest outbreak since 1998, according to the CDC. No one died.California's outbreak is the 2nd largest and the spread cannot be contained by eliminating a contaminated food source. ""You're starting out with a very difficult patient population; probably the most challenging population we have,"" Engel said. ""They don't have any address, they're hard to find and it's a population that's associated with substance abuse and mental illness.""[Byline: Lauryn Schroeder]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[What is occurring now in the California and Michigan outbreaks is demonstrating that there is need for a change in the paradigm for preventing and managing hepatitis A outbreaks. The risk for many of these cases is not what food is eaten but rather what life style is being practiced. That a significant plurality of cases in CA and MI are occurring in people not in the homeless and/or illicit drug use population shows that the outbreak is spilling over these ""risk factor"" banks. Secondary household cases are occurring, healthcare workers are being infected and food handlers (with or without risk factors), as well, are among those infected. The new paradigm for risk reduction needs to address the social issues of homelessness, illicit substance use and mental illness to break the chain of transmission (""Raising Cain"" to ""Raze the Chain"" of transmission) as well as provide better HAV immunity in adults who are old enough not to have received the HAV vaccine in early childhood (basically anyone over 20 years old). These populations (and others) are often pretty much ignored but without addressing these social issues, Mother Nature will set us up for another outbreak and another after that. Just hiding these unfortunates in the shadows will only prolong the inevitable.This article on homelessness in California by Mike McPhate is a good read:<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/09/us/california-today-homeless-camps-with-official-blessing.html?_r=0>, as well as this editorial ""What will it take for homeless people to get a toilet in Sacramento? Oh, just a deadly virus"" by Erika D. Smith <http://www.sacbee.com/opinion/opn-columns-blogs/erika-d-smith/article177720121.html>.Read more here: <http://www.sacbee.com/opinion/opn-columns-blogs/erika-d-smith/article177720121.html#storylink=cpy>.""as the physicians say it happens in hectic fever, that in the beginning of the malady it is easy to cure but difficult to detect, but in the course of time, not having been either detected or treated in the beginning, it becomes easy to detect but difficult to cure"" - NiccolÌ  Machiavelli, The Prince.-Mod.LL]******[2]Maricopa County, ArizonaDate: Fri 7 Oct 2017, 6:00 a.m. MTSource: The Republic [edited]<http://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-health/2017/10/07/hepatitis-outbreak-spread-maricopa-county-homeless-san-diego-officials-say/740185001/>While California struggles with an outbreak that prompted San Diego County to declare a public health emergency, Arizona officials believe the local outbreak was mainly confined to homeless people in Maricopa County. Officials have detected no new Arizona cases since the end of May [2017]. The San Diego outbreak, mainly affecting homeless people and drug users, has killed 17, hospitalized 337 and infected 481 people. Cases also emerged in Los Angeles and Santa Cruz counties.Public health officials say the Maricopa County outbreak was tied to 1 person who traveled from San Diego to Maricopa County earlier in 2017. Follow-up testing confirmed the viral strain matched the San Diego cases and had spread mainly among people who used services from a homeless campus from mid-February [2017] through the end of May [2017].Public health officials continued to monitor the outbreak, but have detected no new cases linked to the California outbreak, according to Sally Ann Iverson, a CDC epidemic intelligence services officer assigned to Maricopa County and Arizona. Neither the Maricopa County Department of Public Health nor the Arizona Department of Health Services broadly notified the public about the outbreak. Iverson said public health officials shared information about the outbreak with employees and users of the unidentified homeless facility.Health officials distributed soap and hand sanitizer and offered shelter employees and homeless clients the hepatitis A vaccine. The vaccine was given to 221 of 1000 clients and 105 of 250 campus staff, according to research presented at an Infectious Diseases Society of America conference in San Diego this week. Officials believe the highly contagious, liver-attacking virus, which is spread through contact with an infected person's feces, circulated due to crowding and poor hygiene among the homeless population in Maricopa County.Hepatitis A also can be spread through contaminated food, but researchers found no evidence that either eating or sleeping at the homeless shelter was connected to the outbreak. Health officials believe they may have slowed the spread of hepatitis A through vaccinations and stressing better hygiene. ""This was in the homeless community and that is where we targeted our intervention,"" said Iverson. She added that some Arizona cases were tied to drug users.Despite the mini-outbreak among Maricopa County homeless people, Iverson said the county has not surpassed the number of hepatitis A cases it typically gets. The county will continue to monitor for new cases and take appropriate actions to halt the disease, Iverson said.[Byline: Ken Alltucker]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[It is interesting that ""Neither the Maricopa County Department of Public Health nor the Arizona Department of Health Services broadly notified the public about the outbreak"" although it was relatively small compared with San Diego, Santa Cruz and eastern Michigan and reportedly did no apparently produce a higher than normal number of cases. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/207>.]
