The Cerebral Lemon Co. [edited]<http://cerebrallemon.com/monkeypox-endemic-worsens-disease-reaches-rivers-akwa-ibom/>The network of panic created by the monkeypox viral disease is hovering over the south-east, after the dreaded disease continued to spread across the south-south states of Bayelsa, Rivers, and Akwa Ibom states.The high levels of interstate travels across the south-east and south-south is a source of worry for residents of the 2 regions.Authorities have been getting assurances since last week that the disease is being contained. Regardless, residents continue to panic over the mystery nature of the pox.Akwa Ibom state has recorded one confirmed case while 2 other cases are still under investigation. Commissioner for Health, Dr Dominic Ukpong, disclosed this in an interview with newsmen in Uyo, Akwa Ibom state capital on [Sat 7 Oct 2017].According to Dr Ukpong, ""the era of avoiding excessive handshake and body contact is here again. ""We should at the moment re-awaken the continued emphasis on regular hand washing and avoiding the consumption of bush meat at the moment.""Confirming the breakout, Akwa Ibom state commissioner for information, Mr Charles Udoh said: ""Monkeypox currently has no treatment and no vaccine. It looks like smallpox but the rashes are larger while the disease is milder,"" assuring that ""we will provide more information in subsequent releases.""Meanwhile, the monkeypox has begun to take a heavy toll on the social and economic life in Bayelsa. Owing to the contagious nature of the boil-like viral infection, most residents in the state have become extra-careful of the water they drink. Most residents have stopped buying sachet water from Agbura axis of the state in Yenagoa Local Government where the epidemic reportedly broke out.A particular sachet water packaging company (name withheld) in Agbura, has shut down operation, owing to non-patronage as their numerous customers now buy sachet water from other communities in the state. The situation has created a short supply of sachet water in Agbura and other parts of Yenagoa with high demand from population of low income earners who cannot afford bottled.Also, the continuous jingles running on the state radio warning residents not to consume bush meat, antelopes, and monkey had affected operators of restaurants, particularly for fear of contacting monkeypox.A woman whose beer parlour and bush meat restaurant is a popular rendezvous, has continued to count her losses saying, ""business has been very bad. My customers have stopped coming; residents are now scared of eating bush meat, gradually throwing one out of business. Some food vendors have decided to go into other businesses."" A food vendor, said, ""Because of fear of contracting the disease, markets in the state are no longer crowded with customers purchasing meat as it was prior to the outbreak of the monkeypox in the state.""When asked for update on the 47 persons quarantined over the disease, the state Commissioner for Health, Professor Ebitimitula Etebu, said the number of victims had increased from 11 to 13 and contact index increased to 50, even as he posited that the victims, including a 17-year-old boy are responding to treatment and were at various stages of recovery. He also called on the people of the state to report any person with rashes, particularly boil-like rashes which constituted a strong symptom of the disease.He said further that government was proactive, and had set up a committee ""Quick Response Search Medical Team'' to go into the local governments, communities, and fishing settlements to control the spread of the disease.Etebu, however, reiterated that government was prepared to cater for the medical bills of all those that had showed symptoms, even as he appealed to residents with the rashes to voluntarily submit themselves to the government for medical care.[Byline: Ikenna Amadi]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Apparently, cases of monkeypox are appearing in new locations in Nigeria. There seems to be concern about person-to-person spread of the virus. The virus is seldom transmitted directly from one person to another, but there is a documented instance of limited spread in the Republic of the Congo. Concern about a water source is likely unfounded but bush meat as a source of the virus has a basis in fact. Monkeys are not the reservoirs of the virus, despite the name that the virus has received. Although not determined, the main reservoirs of monkeypox in nature are suspected to be rodents, including rope squirrels (_Funisciurus_ spp; an arboreal rodent) and terrestrial rodents in the genera _Cricetomys_ and _Graphiurus_. Pouched rats (_Cricetomys_ spp) have been shown experimentally to be susceptible to monkeypox virus infection. These rats are considered a delicacy and are available for purchase in many markets. It is likely that these human cases represent spill-over from a wild rodent reservoir, rather than from a human-based outbreak. Further epidemiological studies of these cases and the places where transmission may have occurred are needed.As noted in previous ProMED-mail posts, the monkeypox virus clade in the Congo Basin causes more severe disease in humans, with a case fatality rate of 11-17 percent, than the clade in Ghana, which causes few fatalities. The clade of the virus occurring in Nigeria awaits determination. Results from tests done by the World Health Organisation reference laboratory in Dakar, Senegal, are awaited with interest.Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/nigeria.pdf> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/62>. - Mod.TY]
