AllAfrica, Radio Dabanga report [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201710090209.html>Residents of Abu Hamed in northern Sudan's River Nile state have reported an increase in the number of cancer patients in the area. ""Apart from a growing number of people having cancer, we witness as well an increase in miscarriages,"" a listener reported to this station [Radio Dabanga] from Abu Hamed.""Our agricultural crops are not growing as before, and pigeons, hens, and other birds are dying,"" he said.According to the source, the increase in deadly diseases is caused by the use of cyanide by traditional gold mining companies in the region.He therefore demanded the Sudanese president ""to intervene to solve the problem by preventing companies from using internationally prohibited substances.""In May 2014, Radio Dabanga reported about an unusually high rate of cancer in Wadi Halfa. ""Fish are dying, and birds drop dead from the sky,"" a resident from Wadi Halfa said. ""Cyanide spreads through the air, and can reach places over a distance of 150 km [about 93 mi],"" he noted.Environmental hazards--------------------Cyanide and mercury are used, mostly by traditional small-scale miners, for extracting gold from ore. The processes are controversial because of the highly toxic nature of the chemicals.Protests against gold extraction plants in several parts of the country have increased, in particularly this year [2017]. In Northern State, North Kordofan, and North Darfur people took to the streets as well in fear for their health. In July [2017], 2 people were killed in South Kordofan, in a dispute over a gold extraction plant in the area. [Please note these deaths appear to be due to the dispute, not a toxic agent. - Mod.TG]According to El Jeili Hamouda Saleh, Professor of Environmental Law at the Bahri University in Khartoum and legal advisor of the National Committee for Environmental Protection, the use of cyanide and mercury will definitely lead to an environmental disaster in the country.There are more than 40 000 gold mining sites in Sudan, he told this station in August [2017]. About 60 gold processing companies are operating in 13 states of the country, 1/4 of them in South Kordofan.Environmental expert Dr Hasan Mohamed Hamad told this station in December 2016 that significant environmental law violations regularly occur in the oil-producing and mining areas in Sudan.""The foreign mining companies in Sudan never intended to spend money on measures for the protection of the environment. In fact, those companies belong to the most polluting countries in the world,"" he said.Exports-------Since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement with the southern Sudanese rebel movement led by the late John Garang in January 2005, Khartoum began to prepare for a possible secession of the south. As a secession would include the loss of about 2/3 of its oil income, Sudan opted for the development of gold mining to compensate the losses.In December 2016, Minerals Minister Ahmed El Karori reported that Sudan produced 25.6 tons of gold that year so far. The sales abroad amounted to USD 1.24 billion, representing 37 percent of the country's exports. In 2014, Sudan had become Africa's third largest gold producer, with more than USD 1 billion from gold exports.According to the US Enough Project, the majority of Sudanese gold is conflict-affected and entails ""a high risk for money laundering.""Central Darfur--------------The new Minister of Minerals, Hashem Ali Salem, has announced the opening of 10 gold mining blocks in Central Darfur.During his inspection of the Hashaba Mine in Jebel locality, Salem said that gold, lead, copper, and chrome will soon be extracted in Central Darfur. To counter the dangers and waste of mining, the state will provide metal protection equipment, as well as sanitary units and tanks and for clean drinking water.The Minister called on Sudanese and foreign companies to invest in the state's new mining blocks. He said that his Ministry will work on the development of the mining processes by offering opportunities to those companies that use modern mining techniques, and provide economic growth in the area, including work opportunities for the people.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Maps of Sudan can be seen at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/States_of_Sudan> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/30886>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJGold mining with chemicals can produce a combination of chemical exposures which may be toxic. However, cyanide is not among those chemicals linked to cancer. Cyanide may produce death, but not cancer. Latril was a controversial cancer treatment many years ago. Laetrile, from the peach or apricot seed, was alleged to kill only cancer cells. To be fair, there was some success, as well as multiple difficulties. But there is no scientific evidence that laetrile or amygdalin can treat cancer or any other illness. Despite this, it is still promoted as an alternative cancer treatment.In short, cyanide does not produce cancer, but it will produce death if concentrations are high enough.Mercury, however, is a different and serious issue.As stated in Eisler R. Health risks of gold miners: a synoptic review. Environ Geochem Health. 2003; 25(3): 325-45; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12971253>:""Health problems of gold miners who worked underground include decreased life expectancy; increased frequency of cancer of the trachea, bronchus, lung, stomach, and liver; increased frequency of pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB), silicosis, and pleural diseases; increased frequency of insect-borne diseases, such as malaria and dengue fever; noise-induced hearing loss; increased prevalence of certain bacterial and viral diseases; and diseases of the blood, skin, and musculoskeletal system. These problems are briefly documented in gold miners from Australia, North America, South America, and Africa. In general, HIV infection or excessive alcohol and tobacco consumption tended to exacerbate existing health problems. Miners who used elemental mercury to amalgamate and extract gold were heavily contaminated with mercury. Among individuals exposed occupationally, concentrations of mercury in their air, fish diet, hair, urine, blood, and other tissues significantly exceeded all criteria proposed by various national and international regulatory agencies for protection of human health. However, large-scale epidemiological evidence of severe mercury-associated health problems in this cohort was not demonstrable."" - Mod.TG]
