Radio New Zealand [edited]<http://www.radionz.co.nz/international/pacific-news/341337/fiji-island-battling-typhoid-outbreak>The Fiji Ministry of Health and Medical Services says it is closely monitoring reports of typhoid on Moturiki Island in the Lomaiviti Group.It said they had taken prompt action to assist the communities to strengthen clinical management in accordance with the National Typhoid Guideline. The Public Health Team based at Levuka Hospital is working with the communities on Moturiki Island to create awareness and facilitate counseling on the precautionary measures which include safe water, sanitation and hygiene. The Ministry also distributed hand washing and safe water storage kits.It added that a total of 13 patients on Moturiki who had been diagnosed with typhoid [fever] have been treated with the required medical care and the Public Health Team continues to monitor the situation. Mass gatherings had been temporarily suspended in the hot spot areas as a preventative measure.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Typhoid fever, so-called enteric fever caused by _Salmonella enterica_ serotype Typhi, often has a totally different presentation from that of the commoner kinds of salmonellosis. Epidemiologically, usually spread by contaminated food or water, typhoid is not a zoonosis like the more common types of salmonellosis. Clinically, vomiting and diarrhea are typically absent; indeed, constipation is frequently reported. As it is a systemic illness, blood cultures are at least as likely to be positive as stool in enteric fever, particularly early in the course of the infection, and bone marrow cultures may be the most sensitive.The symptoms of classical typhoid fever typically include fever, anorexia, lethargy, malaise, dull continuous headache, non-productive cough, vague abdominal pain, and constipation. Despite the frequently high fever, the pulse is often only slightly elevated. During the 2nd week of the illness, there is protracted fever and mental dullness, classically called coma vigil. Diarrhea may develop but usually does not. Many patients develop hepatosplenomegaly [both liver and spleen enlarged]. After the 1st week or so, many cases develop a maculopapular rash on the upper abdomen. These lesions (""rose spots"") are about 2 cm [0.78 in] in diameter and blanch on pressure. They persist for 2-4 days and may come and go. Mild and atypical infections are common.The word typhoid (as in typhus-like) reflects the similarity of the louse-borne rickettsial disease epidemic typhus and that of typhoid fever; in fact, in some areas, typhoid fever is still referred to as abdominal typhus.The Lomaiviti archipelago of Fiji (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lomaiviti_Islands>) consists of 7 main islands and a number of smaller ones. The largest town, is Levuka, which was Fiji's 1st modern town and served as the capital from 1871 to 1877. The 1st known European sighting of the Lomaiviti Group was recorded in May 1789 by Captain William Bligh, who was on his epic voyage in a lifeboat to Timor having been cast adrift by his crew in the Mutiny on the Bounty. - Mod.LL]
