NBC4i.com, Nextar Media Group Inc [edited]<http://nbc4i.com/2017/10/10/chillicothe-health-center-reports-overwhelming-number-of-hepatitis-c-cases/>A community health center said it's seeing an overwhelming number of cases of hepatitis C. Hopewell Health Center in Chillicothe said 70 percent of about 500 patients in their Vivitrol [naltrexone, an opiate antagonist that can be used in drug rehabilitation programs - Mod. LL] program have tested positive for the contagious liver disease. ""It's definitely from sharing needles,"" said behavioral health clinician Kylie Lemaster.Lemaster is also the coordinator of the Vivitrol program at Hopewell. She said she is alarmed by the large number of patients looking to recover from their opiate addiction, who are testing positive for the bloodborne virus. ""It's really concerning especially when this person is coming in, ready to address their disease and put all the work into it and then it's another barrier that they have to face when they have decided to stop using drugs,"" she said.There is a cure for hepatitis C, but it's expensive. Lemaster said treatment can cost around 80 000 USD.Family nurse practitioner Jim Conkle said many patients don't show symptoms of the disease, which can eventually lead to liver cancer and cirrhosis of the liver. ""Many of them know they've already been exposed to hepatitis, but the desire and the drive for the opiate is so strong that many times they don't see that as a imposing upon their health,"" he said.Lemaster and Conkle said education and prevention are key, but getting addicts opiate-free is just as important. ""By doing that, then it decreases the number of patients that are out on the street and those that are sharing needles,"" said Conkle.Hopewell and the Heroin Partnership Project are working together to find a solution to this hepatitis C increase. One of the options they're exploring is creating a community needle exchange program.[Byline: Courtney Yuen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Most cases of acute hepatitis C are not recognized or reported because they are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice) so the case numbers are likely underreported.In the absence of a vaccine for hepatitis C (as are available for hepatitis A and B), infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse.Chillicothe is a city in and the county seat of Ross County, Ohio. The location of the county, in south-central Ohio, can be found at:<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chillicothe,_Ohio>. - Mod.LL]
