WHO via ReliefWeb [edited]<https://reliefweb.int/report/syrian-arab-republic/syria-cvdpv2-outbreak-situation-report-17-10-october-2017>Key highlights- One (1) new case of cVDPV2 was reported this week [week ending 15 Oct 2017]from Mayadeen district, Deir Ez-Zor governorate. The case, a 19-month-old child with no history of polio vaccination, had onset of paralysis on [19 Aug 2017].- The total number of confirmed cVDPV2 cases is 48.- The 2nd immunization round for Raqqa commenced on [7 Oct 2017]; mOPV2 is being administered to children 0-59 months of age, and IPV to children aged between 2-23 months. Aqua tabs are being provided to families together with vaccination.- Initial reports indicate that vaccination has started in all 3 districts of Raqqa (Tell Abyad, Raqqa and Thawra).Immunization responseThe national response plan currently includes 2 immunization rounds each in Deir Ez-Zor and Raqqa governorates. Deir Ez-Zor activities include the southern part of Shadadi district in Hasakah governorate. The 1st and 2nd rounds for Deir Ez-Zor have been completed ([22-26 Jul 2017, 22-28 Aug 2017]), as well as the 1st round for Raqqa ([12-17 Aug 2017]).Raqqa- The 2nd immunization round for Raqqa commenced on [7 Oct 2017]; mOPV2 is being administered to children 0-59 months of age, and IPV to children aged between 2-23 months. Aqua tabs are being provided to families together with vaccination.- Initial reports indicate that vaccination has started in all 3 districts of Raqqa (Tell Abyad, Raqqa and Thawra).- A total of 160 mobile and 30 fixed vaccination teams are implementing the campaign; 32 team supervisors and 5 senior coordinators are managing field activities.- Community leaders in Raqqa have been engaged in all districts to assist in the monitoring of vaccination activities and to help facilitate access of vaccination teams. Community leaders are reporting directly to vaccination teams, supervisors, and the polio control room in Tell Abyad.- Reserve mOPV2 stocks are being stored in Thawra to cater for population influxes, as part of contingency plans. An additional 60 vaccination teams are on standby for contingency activities.- Vaccination teams have been trained on reporting cases of AFP. A team in rural Tell Abyad has reported an AFP case during the round; the AFP case is under investigation.Deir Ez-Zor- IPV vaccination for children missed in the 2nd Deir Ez-Zor round continues through local health centers.Other governorates- IPV campaign activities aiming to reach children aged between 2-23 months in areas of Aleppo and Idlib governorates are ongoing. The campaign started on [30 Sep 2017].- Screening of IDPs from infected areas continues, with active searches for AFP cases conducted among new arrivals. Collection of stool samples from healthy children to boost surveillance, and provision of additional doses of IPV to children from infected areas, continues. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The outbreak continues. It is important to note that this latest case had date of onset several weeks after the 1st immunization response round, yet this child had no history of having ever received any doses of polio vaccine. This highlights the challenges of vaccination activities in areas of civil unrest and where there may be rumors circulating discrediting vaccinations.The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/86>. - Mod.MPP]******[2] EMRO Regional Committee meetingDate: Wed 11 Oct 2017Source: WHO via Relief Web [excerpted]<https://reliefweb.int/report/pakistan/first-day-64th-regional-committee-eastern-mediterranean-focuses-polio-eradication>...An update on polio eradication in Pakistan and Afghanistan in the Region highlighted the success of polio supplementary immunization activities in 2017 in restricting transmission. Ensuring an end to polio transmission in Pakistan and Afghanistan in the coming low season and transmission in Syrian Arab Republic remained a challenge.With the Region experiencing an unprecedented increase in the magnitude and scale of crises, humanitarian emergencies were also prominent on the 1st day's agenda; the Region more than 50 percent of global Grade 3 emergencies were in the Region with other countries experiencing a mix of chronic and acute emergencies. Refugees in the Region now totalled 15.7 million and 18 million people were internally displaced. Population movement was overwhelming health systems of host communities and neighbouring countries, and in some cases, reversing health gains. The high incidence of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases was impacting global and regional health security. In response, the WHO Health Emergency Programme had mobilized 293 million USD and delivered 920 tons of health supplies but the funding gap remained at 200 million USD....--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The humanitarian crises pose significant challenges to the vaccination activities, and specifically to the polio eradication effort, with the high population displacement. - Mod.MPP]******[3] Nanopatch technology - Early studiesDate: Tue 3 Oct 2017Source: Nature [edited]<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-13011-0>Citation--------Muller DA, Fernando GJP, Owens NS, et al. High-density microprojection array delivery to rat skin of low doses of trivalent inactivated poliovirus vaccine elicits potent neutralising antibody responses. Sci Rep. 2017, 3;7(1):12644. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13011-0. To secure a polio-free world, the live attenuated oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) will eventually need to be replaced with inactivated poliovirus vaccines (IPV). However, current IPV delivery is less suitable for campaign use than OPV, and more expensive. We are progressing a microarray patch delivery platform, the Nanopatch, as an easy-to-use device to administer vaccines, including IPV. The Nanopatch contains an ultra-high density array (10,000/cm2) of short (approx 230 micro-m) microprojections that delivers dry coated vaccine into the skin. Here, we compare the relative immunogenicity of Nanopatch immunisation versus intramuscular [IM] injection in rats, using monovalent and trivalent formulations of IPV. Nanopatch delivery elicits faster antibody response kinetics, with high titres of neutralising antibody after just 1 (IPV2) or 2 (IPV1 and IPV3) immunisations, while IM injection requires 2 (IPV2) or 3 (IPV1 and IPV3) immunisations to induce similar responses. Seroconversion to each poliovirus type was seen in 100 percent of rats that received approx. 1/40th of a human dose of IPV delivered by Nanopatch, but not in rats given approx. 1/8th or approx. 1/40th dose by IM injection. Ease of administration coupled with dose reduction observed in this study suggests the Nanopatch could facilitate inexpensive IPV vaccination in campaign settings.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[We usually do not include early studies on early new biologics as the number of such technologies that go on to success is very limited. That being said, the above technology seems very promising to address the rate limiting logistic issues associated with the use of IPV for polio vaccination. Administration of injectable vaccines requires a higher level of training of the vaccinator and the obligatory requirement of ""one needle, one syringe"" per dose of vaccine administered to prevent transmission of other pathogens along with administration of vaccines. Should this ""Nanopatch"" technology for vaccine administration perform as well in humans as it has in laboratory rats, it will change the landscape for administration of IPV, and potentially other injectable antigens as well. The full article is available for review at the above given URL and is worth reading. In the discussion section the authors comment: ""In this study we have demonstrated that IPV of all 3 poliovirus serotypes can be formulated onto a single MAP device, the Nanopatch, and elicit neutralising antibody responses to all 3 poliovirus strains in rats. Furthermore, we demonstrated that there is no difference in response if IPV is delivered in either a monovalent or trivalent formulation, suggesting no immune competition. The fractional doses (1/8th and 1/40th) used in this study when delivered by Nanopatch gave similar rates of seroconversion and median poliovirus neutralising titres to a full human dose delivered by IM injection, and after fewer doses. If the results from these studies translate from the rat model to humans, this could significantly reduce the dose required to produce an effective neutralising antibody response.""While the same seroconversion rates and dose-sparing effects were not achieved for types 1 and 3 as with IPV2, animals vaccinated by the Nanopatch still had overall higher titres, faster anti-poliovirus antibody kinetics, and higher seroconversion rates than their IM counterparts. In addition, the relative immunogenicity of the 3 IPV types was the same regardless of whether they were delivered by Nanopatch or IM injection. Furthermore, after the full vaccination course, animals receiving a full human dose IM or by Nanopatch had no significant difference in terms of antibody titre or seroconversion rate. Within the triple monovalent and trivalent experiments the Nanopatch groups receiving a 1/8th fractional dose showed a faster initial induction of anti-IPV antibody responses in comparison to the 1/40th fractional dose. At the completion of both studies, however, animals achieved similar titres against all IPV types whether receiving the 1/8th or 1/40th fractional doses by Nanopatch. We hypothesize that once an initial immune response is established against IPV the Nanopatch may provide a booster effect to the pre-existing immune response - possibly through a physical immune enhancer effect within the skin's immune environment by its dynamic application - resulting in an overall similar IPV titre being achieved by either fractional dose group. In support of this Soonawala, et al. demonstrated that a 1/5th fractional IPV dose delivered I.D. by Pharmajet inject was effective at boosting pre-existing polio immunity [ref 21 in the original article]. The studies presented here are the 1st microarray patch studies to demonstrate significantly higher antibody titres for poliovirus 1 and 2 from a single trivalent IPV formulation. While IPV3 did not elicit a significantly higher antibody response when delivered by Nanopatch in comparison to IM, there was still significant dose sparing, with 1/40th dose of IPV3 producing similar titres to the full human IPV3 dose. While the lack of immune enhancement observed in the IPV3 responses is somewhat unexpected given the higher immune responses elicited with the Nanopatch for IPV1 and 2, there is precedent for this result. Previously, it has been reported that IPV3 produces relatively low responses compared to IPV1 and 2, when using fractional doses and/or solid IPV formulations [refs. 10, 34, 35 in the original article]. This suggests the IPV3 component of the vaccine is possibly (1) less immunogenic than IPV1 and 2, or (2) not in excess. Combined these results suggest there may be a need to optimise the ratio of each IPV component for delivery by the Nanopatch to achieve maximal virus neutralising titres in vaccine recipients.""We await results of studies on human subjects. - Mod.MPPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/63155>.]
