USA Today, (Salisbury, MD) Daily Times report [edited]<https://goo.gl/QQFKLA>About 150 people from 8 states have reported becoming ill after attending a cook-off in Virginia. More than 20 cultures from different laboratories in Virginia and Maryland tested positive for salmonellae, after scores of people became ill after attending the Chincoteague Chili and Chowder Cook Off on 30 Sep 2017.Together with additional samples the local health district sent to a state laboratory, the evidence points to one thing, a health official said. ""We are positive it is a salmonella outbreak,"" said David Matson, director of the Eastern Shore Health District. Most of the samples tested were submitted by physicians who saw people who were ill.About 150 people reported becoming ill after eating food at the event, according to the health district. About half of those who became ill sought medical care, including some who were hospitalized, although that exact number is not known. Another 200 people who filled out an online survey said they did not get sick after attending the event. The survey was created after the health district received so many phone calls after the event that the office's telephone system was overwhelmed, causing it to shut down, Matson said.Matson urged anyone who attended the event to fill out the survey if they have not done so yet, even if they did not become ill. Some 2000 people attended the cook-off. Most who reported illness became sick either the day after or 2 days after the cook-off, but a few fell ill days later -- which Matson said can be the case with salmonellosis.The CDC estimates that about 1.2 million illnesses and about 450 deaths occur due to non-typhoidal salmonellae annually in the USA.Young children, older adults, and people with weakened immune systems are the most likely to have severe infections, according to the CDC. Most people infected with _Salmonella_ develop diarrhea, fever, and abdominal cramps between 12 and 72 hours after infection. The illness usually lasts 4 to 7 days, and most people recover without treatment.Most of those stricken are Virginia residents, followed by Maryland residents. Additionally, cases have been reported from residents of Delaware, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and North Carolina who attended the event.Nothing in the health district's investigation points to contamination from an outside source, such as a food processor or a store, to which others could be exposed. ""We think that this all happened on a single day at a single place,"" Matson said, adding it is not yet known exactly how the sick people were exposed to the bacteria. Pinpointing the source of the outbreak is difficult because many different food providers were at the event and numerous people handled the food for each kitchen there, Matson said.[Byline: Carol Vaughn]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[As expected, the etiology of the illnesses is _Salmonella_. The underlying source of the foodborne infection is not clear but with an attack rate of about 7.5 percent (150/2000), it should be possible to dissect out the source from food diaries of those affected and those not. The main foods served were chilis and chowders, both served hot, so it is possible that the source was a side dish.Chincoteague is, speaking from personal experience spending time there with children and grandchildren, a magical place with great beaches and wonderful food -- much of it fresh out of the ocean moments before -- in restaurants and food trucks. The area is home to hundreds of wild ponies that have lived on the salt flats. Legend has it that the feral ponies are descendants of survivors of a Spanish galleon that sank on its way to Spain during a storm in 1750 off the east coast, but the likelihood is that they are actually descended from domesticated stock, brought to the island by Eastern Shore farmers in the 17th century to avoid fencing requirements and taxation. Because of their diet, the equines do not grow tall enough to be a true horse, hence the term pony. The main distinction between ponies and horses is height. A horse is usually considered to be an equine that is at least 14.2 hands (or about 4 feet, 10 inches [1.48 m]) tall. A pony, on the other hand (pun totally intended!), is an equine less than 14.2 hands. The ponies wander the area, often to be seen on the public beaches.The town is known for these Chincoteague ponies, although these are not actually on the island of Chincoteague but on nearby Assateague Island. These ponies and the annual Pony Penning Day (the last consecutive Wednesday and Thursday in July) are the subject of Marguerite Henry's 1947 children's book Misty of Chincoteague, which was made into the 1961 family film Misty, filmed on location.The so-called Delmarva peninsula off of which Chincoteague and Assateague Islands are found contain Delaware and parts of Maryland and Virginia and can be found on a map at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delmarva_Peninsula>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/19038>.]
