Euro Surveillance [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/content/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2017.22.41.17-00644>Bakonyi T, Jungbauer C, Aberle SW., et al. Usutu virus infections among blood donors, Austria, July and August 2017 - Raising awareness for diagnostic challenges.In 2014, the Austrian Red Cross, Blood Service for Vienna, Lower Austria and Burgenland, initiated regular screening of all blood donated between 1 June - 30 November each year for West Nile virus (WNV) by a nucleic acid test (NAT). Positive samples have been found each year since. In 2017, several positive samples were identified, however, WNV could not be confirmed by other molecular tests; this prompted us to conduct more detailed molecular analyses of these samples.Description of the Usutu positive blood donors----------------------------------------------The 7 USUV-positive donors were between 20 and 60 years of age, and consisted of 6 men and one woman. They all originated from the Austrian federal states of Vienna, Lower Austria and Burgenland, respectively. Of these, 6 could be interviewed, and only one reported a temporary stay abroad (in Sicily) 1-2 weeks before blood donation. None of the donors reported clinical symptoms, neither in the 4 weeks before nor at subsequent controls after blood donation. Also the WNV-confirmed donor in 2017 was asymptomatic and had acquired the infection in Lower Austria.Discussion----------USUV, an African, mosquito-borne flavivirus, emerged in Vienna and its surroundings in 2001, where it caused considerable die-off of birds, mainly Eurasian blackbirds (_Turdus merula_). However, its emergence in Europe dates back to at least 1996, when an episode of wild bird mortality was observed in the Tuscany region of Italy. USUV-associated bird mortality was subsequently found in several European countries. In 2016, widespread USUV activity was reported in wild birds in Belgium, France, Germany and the Netherlands as well as in Austria (in the same area as 2001-2006) and Hungary.Only 2 USUV isolations from humans have been reported in Africa: one in 1981 from a patient with fever and rash in the Central African Republic, and the other in 2004 from a child with fever and jaundice in Burkina Faso.In Austria, investigations in USUV-endemic areas in and south of Vienna during August and September 2003, when the virus was active in wild birds, revealed USUV-specific nucleic acid in the blood of a young man with rash, and USUV-neutralizing antibodies in 54 of 208 individuals tested.In 2009 USUV nucleic acid was detected in 2 critically ill, immunocompromised persons in Italy: one patient with B-cell lymphoma who developed meningoencephalitis and another patient who developed neurological disease after receiving an orthotopic liver transplant. Meanwhile the complete coding sequence of the latter USUV strain (designated Bologna 2009) was determined and, in an attempt to identify genetic markers potentially associated with severe illness, compared with other USUVs.In subsequent years, USUV-specific antibodies were detected in healthy blood donors as well as in patients with neurological symptoms in Italy, Germany and Croatia. Screening of 13 023 blood donations from the University Hospital Aachen, Germany, in 2016 - during the simultaneous widespread USUV epidemic in birds in western and central Europe - revealed one flavivirus-RNA-positive sample with the cobas TaqScreen WNV test, which was identified as USU. In a recent study conducted between 2008 and 2011 in the Modena region of Italy, which involved 915 patients with or without neurological impairments, the percentage of USUV RNA- and antibody-positive samples was significantly higher than that of WNV, raising the issue on the potential of USUV to cause human neuroinvasive disease The deleterious effect of USUV on human neural cells was also shown experimentally.In Austria, blood donors have to answer an extended medical questionnaire before donation. Several questions refer to visits to countries endemic for pathogens transmissible by substances of human origin including WNV. Travellers returning from WNV-endemic regions have either to be screened by WNV NAT or have to be deferred for 28 days after their return from an affected area.The goal of this communication is to raise awareness of blood transfusion services and public health authorities in countries, which have reported USUV infections: (i) of an increase of USUV detections in blood donations in eastern Austria in 2017 compared with the 2 previous years, and (ii) of the possibility that USUV infections may be misdiagnosed as WNV, due to tests not distinguishing between these 2 viruses.The latter is actually not a real problem because any flavivirus (including both WNV and USUV) infected blood donation must be discarded; nonetheless the diagnosis should be verified/falsified by virus-specific follow-up molecular tests to precisely identify the causative agent. Etiological diagnosis might also reveal other flaviviruses such as Zika virus, dengue virus, etc. The minimum sensitivity of the Roche cobas WNV assay is approximately 13 copies/mL in a pooled sample, which corresponds to 250 copies of WNV RNA/mL for each individual blood donation (Health Canada standard). The virus loads in the USUV positive samples were low, therefore not all samples were uniformly positive in all conventional and RT-qPCRs applied, consequently only 5 sequences could be included in the NS5-3'UTR phylogenetic analysis (Figure 2 in the URL). Despite the observed cross-reactivity, the Roche cobas WNV test is a sensitive and very valuable screening test for flavivirus nucleic acid in blood samples. Cross-reactivity was also found in another WNV screening test.The phylogenetic analyses demonstrated a close genetic relationship of the Austrian blood donor-derived USUV sequences with the recent bird-derived Austrian and Hungarian sequences, suggesting that the same viruses are capable of infecting both animals and humans. The same is true for the German Aachen 2016 blood donor-derived sequence, which clusters together with bird-derived sequences from the same region in the 'Europe 3' cluster. The Austrian coding-complete sequence derived from a healthy blood donor in 2017 is almost identical to the Bologna 2009 sequence isolated from a critically ill patient with neurological symptoms - 10,769/10,792 nt identities and only 2 amino acid differences (Asp770Asn and Lys2520Arg). This might suggest that host factors such as age, comorbidities, and immunosuppression, and not necessarily genetic markers of the infecting virus, influence the clinical outcome of a human USUV infection. It is also worth mentioning that none of the Austrian USUV-positive blood donors showed any clinical symptoms.Although USUV is a potential human pathogen, there are no specific regulations on screening blood donations for this virus. According to the general rules, only clinically healthy people are allowed to donate blood. However, as described above, the USUV-positive blood donors did not show any symptoms before and after donation. Although WNV and USUV endemic areas in Europe largely overlap, there are some countries (particularly Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland) where USUV is endemic, but autochthonous WNV infections have not been reported so far. Blood transfusions are frequently applied to immunosuppressed or critically ill patients so there is a potential risk for development of nosocomial USUV-associated neurological disease in such patients, in USUV endemic countries that do not screen for flaviviruses. Therefore we propose that extension of flavivirus screening of blood donations might be taken into consideration by USUV-endemic European countries.In order to raise awareness and allow timely actions, we intentionally wrote this paper at this point in time when the WNV and USUV transmission seasons are still ongoing, which, depending on weather conditions, may last in central Europe until the end of October.--Communicated by:Norbert Nowotny, PhD, Professor of VirologyUniversity of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria, and Mohammed Bin Rashid University of Medicine and Health Sciences,Dubai, UAE<Norbert.Nowotny@vetmeduni.ac.at>[The report provides a helpful summary of the Usutu virus situation in Europe and it relationship, or lack of it, to human clinical disease. The point that blood transfusions are frequently given to immunosuppressed or critically ill patients with a potential risk for development of nosocomial USUV-associated neurological diseases is an important one. Interested readers are urged to access the complete report with its figures showing genetic relationships and an ample list of references at the above URL. Professor Nowotny is thanked for providing this report.A Health Map/ProMED-mail map of Europe showing the location of Austria and the other countries mentioned can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9921>. - Mod.TY]
