The Connexion [edited]<https://www.connexionfrance.com/French-news/10-year-old-boy-in-Lyon-hospital-with-rabies-infection>A 10-year-old boy is in hospital in Lyon, having contracted rabies from an infected stray puppy while travelling in Sri Lanka.The Institut Pasteur confirmed that the boy had been infected by a viral strain of the disease after being bitten in August [2017]. He had received no preventative treatment after the bite, no treatment while away, nor had any medical attention after returning to France, according to reports in French newspaper Le Monde.The boy began to show signs of the disease, which causes swelling of the brain, on [Sun 1 Oct 2017], including difficulties swallowing, confusion, and a sense of panic.He was seen by the hospital centre at Villefranche-sur-Saޮne (Rhޮne), who diagnosed him before immediately sending him to the hospital in Lyon by the SAMU 69 (ambulance). Upon arrival, the boy deteriorated rapidly, had a cardiac arrest, and was admitted immediately.Rabies is primarily transmitted by the saliva of a dog or a wild animal, through a bite or licking of a wound. Its principal symptom is swelling of the brain (encephalitis), and it is nearly always fatal once clinical symptoms begin to appear.Its incubation period - the time between initial infection and symptoms showing up - can vary from a few days to several months.The case is being followed closely by the French operational centre for the reception and regulation of health and social emergencies (le Centre op޸rationnel de r޸ception et de r޸gulation des urgences sanitaires et sociales, CORRUSS), which monitors any national or international alerts 24/7.The risk of human-to-human contact of rabies is negligible, but friends and family of the boy, as well as doctors who have treated him, have all been vaccinated against the disease as a precaution. A vaccination session for anyone who has come into contact with the boy - including other children at his school - is to be held on [Thu 12 Oct 2017].The region has access to 250 vaccinations, which authorities have said will be sufficient to prevent any further spread.CORRUSS has also alerted the Sri Lankan authorities and is seeking to warn any other tourists who were staying at the same hotel as the boy.Travellers are advised to have rabies vaccinations before visiting affected countries, and in the case of an actual bite, are urged to immediately get medical help, including further anti-rabies vaccinations, plus emergency hospital support.According to the Institut Pasteur, rabies kills 59 000 people worldwide every year. France has not seen a case of rabies contracted in the country itself since 1924, and there have only been 20 cases of ""imported"" rabies - those contracted abroad and then brought back to France - between 1970 and 2016.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Sri Lanka is one of the heaviest rabies-infected countries. The following advise for those visiting Sri Lanka is available in USA'a CDC web-site (updated 2 Jun 2017):""Rabies can be found in dogs, bats, and other mammals in Sri Lanka, so CDC recommends this [rabies] vaccine for the following groups:1. Travelers involved in outdoor and other activities (such as camping, hiking, biking, adventure travel, and caving) that put them at risk for animal bites.2. People who will be working with or around animals (such as veterinarians, wildlife professionals, and researchers).3. People who are taking long trips or moving to Sri Lanka4. Children, because they tend to play with animals, might not report bites, and are more likely to have animal bites on their head and neck"".Tragically, the scenario presented in art 4 became realized in the current case, albeit without preventive vaccination. - Mod.AS]******[2] Indonesia, Bali, human suspectedDate: Sat 7 Oct 2017Source: Bali Discovery Tours [edited]<https://www.balidiscovery.com/messages/message.asp?Id=17553>A 32-year-old man from the Village of Bebetin, Buleleng, North Bali died at the Buleleng General Hospital on [Fri 6 Oct 2017] morning, after having been bit twice by a local dog.[The victim], who worked as a guide, was brought to the hospital 2 days before his death complaining he was unable to urinate. After doctors installed a catheter, the man was allowed to return home for continued care as an outpatient.Later, on the same day, he returned to the hospital suffering respiratory problems.A relation said [the victim] said he was bitten on the ankle by a 6-month-old puppy 3 days before but, due to other commitments, sought no treatment for the bite. More important, however, the man had also been bitten 6 months prior to that by a dog that died and was later determined to be rabies positive. Despite the positive rabies finding on the dead dog, he did not seek treatment with an anti-rabies vaccine.In the final 24 plus hours at the Buleleng General Hospital, he exhibited classic rabies symptoms including rage, hydrophobia, and foaming at the mouth.He is survived by a wife and 3 small children.Hospital officials have confirmed that the man's death was probably due to rabies, a diagnosis to be confirmed by laboratory tests.Hospital officials urged the public to always seek medical treatment if a dog bites them.[Byline: Ketut Restiada]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is rather unlikely that the victim developed clinical rabies and subsequent death within, 3 and 5 days, respectively, after being bitten on his ankle. In case rabies is eventually confirmed, the 1st exposure - 6 months earlier - might have been the actual time of (fatal) infection.Confirmation of rabies (or otherwise) in this case, will be appreciated.The rabies outbreak in Bali's dog population started in November 2008; 3-digit confirmed human cases were reported during the 1st years. Human and animal rabies cases have been confirmed near popular tourist destinations throughout the island. Efforts, including vaccinating dogs for rabies, have been made to control the outbreak. These efforts appear to have led to reduced incidence but not yet to rabies eradication from the touristic island. - Mod.AS]******[3] Algeria, Tizi Ouzo, human, animalDate: Thu 5 Oct 2017 00:00Source: L'expression [in French, trans. Mod.AB, edited]<http://www.lexpressiondz.com/actualite/277026-la-rage-fait-rage-a-boghni.html>Up to 43 percent of human rabies cases reported to the Tizi Ouzou University Hospital between 2010 and 2017 were recorded in the district of Boghni.This was revealed yesterday [Wed 4 Oct 2017], by specialists in Tizi Ouzou. Dr Karima Taޛeb of the Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine (Semep), who presented the results of this work during an information day on rabies, explained that these cases, registered between 2010 and 2017, could be explained by the presence of a leishmaniasis outbreak in this same region of southern Tizi Ouzou province. The rest of the cases were recorded in the Ouacifs, Azazga, Larbaa n'Ath Irathen and Ouaguenoune, with 14.25 percent of the cases reported in each of these localities, said the study that emphasizes that during the period 2010 -2017, 9 cases of human rabies, including one in 2017, were recorded in the province of Tizi Ouzou.According to the same study, 50 percent of these cases, of which 78 percent involved men and 22 percent women, were caused by unvaccinated domestic animals. The exposures were caused in 89 percent of cases by bites, and in 21 percent [11 percent?] by scratches or licking, Dr. Taޛeb said.In addition, another retrospective study on 499 cases (66.73 percent for males and 33.27 percent for females) bites and scratches by animals reported to the Infectious Diseases Department of Tizi Ouzou in 2016, uncovered the fact that 49.30 percent of these bites were caused by dogs, 41.48 percent by cats, 6.01 percent by rats and 3.21 percent by other animal species (jackals, horses, owls, hamsters, sheep). The same study indicated that 75.95 percent of these bites and scratches were caused by stray animals, 23.85 percent by domestic animals, and 0.20 percent by wildlife. Also 94.19 percent bites/scratches were by unvaccinated domestic animals against only 5.81 percent by vaccinated animals.With regard to medical care, the team of the Tizi Ouzou University hospital, which carried out this study, observed that of the 499 people who were bitten, 81.56 percent underwent serotherapy, while the rest, 18.64 percent, did not.The participants stressed the importance of prevention by vaccination of domestic animals and compulsory consultation in case of bites even in cases of minimal wounds which, too often are considered - wrongly - as harmless.[Byline: Kamel Boudjaji]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The statistics of human rabies cases between 2010 and 2017 were analyzed. The distribution of these cases by district places Boghni by far at the 1st rank and this is explained by the high prevalence of leishmaniasis in this part of the province. In fact, it could be explained by a high density of stray dogs that transmit rabies as well as leishmaniasis to humans.Up to 50 percent of human rabies cases are caused by bites or scratches from unvaccinated domestic animals, hence the need to ensure that this vaccination (legally compulsory) covers all of these animals.The distribution of bite / scratch cases by sex and animal species follows the pattern found in other North African countries where rabies is said to be ""urban"" with stray dogs and gutter cats playing the main role in disease transmission. The role of cats seems however to be very important in the province of Tizi Ouzou. - Mod.ABA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6010>.]
