Seychelles Ministry of Health Facebook Page [edited]<https://www.facebook.com/mohseychellesofficial/posts/>Today, Sun 15 Oct 2017 at 10:00 am, the 12 family members (11 on Mahe and 1 on Praslin) of the 1st index probable case were discharged home after completing the stipulated 7 days' post exposure to a probable plague case. They have remained well and without symptoms. Meanwhile, the outbreak in Madagascar continues and remains uncontrolled.Suspected Case update:- A total of 13 people remain admitted in isolation in hospital. The index patient (probable case) is still admitted on the hospital ward and has no symptoms and is stable. Today is the 7th day of treatment, and, as per clinical guidelines, the patient is no longer infectious. He remains to complete his antibiotic course. The other patients in the hospital are stable on treatment and asymptomatic. These include the foreign national.Contact tracing and surveillance:- The total number of people admitted at the Perseverance military academy for active surveillance are now 6. None of them have developed any symptoms. 11 family members of the 1st probable case were discharged to go home today, 15 Oct 2017, as they did not develop any symptoms during their stay. This confirms that they did not contract plague. Minister Jean Paul Adam along with other senior health officials were there to talk with them before they took their transport home.- 1 family member on active surveillance at Baie Ste Anne Praslin hospital is also being discharged today, Sun 15 Oct 2017.- 3 Seychellois nationals returned from Madagascar via Nairobi on Thu 12 Oct 2017. They remain well and are receiving prophylaxis.- 2 Australians who arrived on Fri 13 Oct 2017 from Mauritius after having spent time in Madagascar will remain in active surveillance for 7 days before being released on 20 Oct 2017, if they do not develop any symptoms.- The Japanese and 2 Italians left Seychelles last night.A total of 577 children and 63 teachers at Anse Boileau Primary School and cr̬che have been given antimicrobial prophylaxis. This is a precautionary measure in view of a potential contact with an admitted child. By Tue 17 Oct 2017, they will have spent 7 days after contact with the admitted child. While they have to finish their antibiotics course, they will come off passive surveillance.Regional Health facilities (Beau Vallon, English River, Les Mamelles, Anse Boileau health centres and Anse Royale and Baie Ste Anne Hospitals) are being used to assess contact and provide prophylaxis.The Public Health Authority (PHA) is reinforcing the advisory to discourage people from traveling to Madagascar for the time being.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The Ministry of Health here has done an excellent job in managing the importation of pneumonic plague from Madagascar. There have been no documented cases transmitted to Seychelles as of now. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/183>.]
