.0,5913106.0,2016-01-04 07:53:04,North America,,Rabies,Humans,?id=20160104.3908827,PRO/AH/EDR> Rabies - Americas (02): comment,"RABIES - AMERICAS (02): COMMENT*******************************A ProMED-mail post<http://www.promedmail.org>ProMED-mail is a program of theInternational Society for Infectious Diseases<http://www.isid.org>Date: 3 Jan 2015From: Ryan Wallace <euk5@cdc.gov> [edited][Re: ProMED-mail Rabies - Americas (01): USA (NJ,VA) Canada (ON) 20160102.3906117----------------------------------------------------------------------[The comment below is directed at the 1st article in the ProMED-mail posting referenced above. This article concerns rabies imported to the USA from Egypt. - Mod.TG]I am certain that many ProMED subscribers would likely agree that in a semi-scientific forum like ProMED, one should probably be critiquing the original MMWR article and not the New Jersey news article summarizing the original work.--Ryan WallaceCDC/OID/NCEZID<euk5@cdc.gov>[The MMWR was not referenced in the New Jersey article, and we regret that the mention of the CDC did not trigger a response to look for an MMWR article.The original article in MMWR may be found at <http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6449a2.htm>.The moderator comment referred to contained questions regarding the exposure of presumably other healthy animals. Without the original article to understand how the animals were transported, there was concern that other animals should have been tracked down and determined whether there was a risk to them or to any of the humans who adopted these animals or had handled them. The moderator's comments were an expression of concern.The original MMWR article contains this paragraph: ""Potential human exposures were identified by interviewing U.S.-based airline cargo staff members, the U.S. transporter, dog A's caretaker, and volunteers and employees associated with animal rescue group A. Upon the shipment's arrival in New York, 8 persons were involved in moving the dogs and cats from the plane onto a transport trailer and then into the U.S. transporter's vehicle. The New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene interviewed these 8 persons; all reported having worn leather gloves while handling the crates and having had no direct contact with the animals. Public health investigators determined that the animals did not have contact with each other during transport except for dog A and her puppy aged 10 weeks (dog B), which were transported in the same crate. Both dogs had reportedly been collected off the streets of Cairo 5 days before shipment.""This paragraph clarifies that the only other animal at risk was the affected animal's puppy as well as looking after human exposure concerns.The following was also contained in the MMWR article: ""The Virginia investigation focused on contact with dog A after departing the airport cargo area through the time of the veterinary assessment in Virginia. Health department personnel in Virginia evaluated 30 persons for possible rabies exposure; no bite exposures were reported. 18 persons initiated rabies post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP), including 10 who were considered to have been exposed and 8 who requested PEP despite reporting no clear rabies exposure. Eight of the 18 persons receiving PEP reported having previously received rabies pre-exposure prophylaxis.Domestic animal exposure investigations revealed that all animals in the Egyptian shipment, except for dogs A and B, had been crated individually in the airplane's cargo hold and held separately after arriving in the United States until delivered to their final destinations. Investigators thought it unlikely that the cats in this shipment had interacted with dog A, even while in Egypt. CDC's cat importation regulations do not require that cats be vaccinated against rabies; therefore, the cats were not required under federal regulations to be confined, vaccinated, or revaccinated against rabies.""The Virginia Department of Health considered that the only dog among the animals in the Egyptian shipment to have been exposed to dog A during the rabies infectious period was her puppy, dog B. Dog A's caretaker was pet sitting a neighbor's dog and providing care within her household for 8 other dogs, as well as 9 other animals. The Virginia Department of Health identified 7 dogs in dog A's caretaker's home as having been exposed to rabies. (Dog B was housed with a different caretaker.) The local health department determined that all of the exposed dogs except dog B had current rabies vaccination certificates from licensed veterinary hospitals. The dogs with current certificates received a rabies booster vaccination followed by 45 days of confinement at their owners' homes, as recommended by the Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention and Control (4). Dog B, who was aged under 12 weeks at the time and had not received an initial dose of rabies vaccine, was vaccinated against rabies and placed in strict isolation for 90 days, followed by 90 days of home confinement (Table). To ensure that the dog was vaccinated according to the vaccine manufacturer's label specifications (at age 3 months or older), another dose of rabies vaccine was administered to dog B 1 month before release from strict isolation (Table). Dogs C and D each received a booster dose of rabies vaccine, followed by 90 days of home confinement.""These paragraphs indicate that appropriate epidemiological investigation was done to trace movement of the affected animals and people who had contact with them.However, information in the paragraphs above contains the statement: ""CDC's cat importation regulations do not require that cats be vaccinated against rabies; therefore, the cats were not required under federal regulations to be confined, vaccinated, or revaccinated against rabies.""Yet the animals were being transported to Virginia and the MMWR contains the following statement: ""State regulations often are more strict. For example, all dogs and cats imported into Virginia by rescue groups must be accompanied by a Certificate of Veterinary Inspection issued by a veterinarian in the state or country of origin no fewer than 10 days before the animal enters Virginia. In addition, if the animal (i.e., a dog or cat) is aged 4 months or older, it must be vaccinated against rabies.""So while it is understandable that state regulations may be more strict, the MMWR article does not appear to address whether or when the cats were vaccinated.The MMWR article acknowledges that there have been 4 rabies cases imported from the Middle East on questionable certificates of vaccination against rabies, and all 4 of these cases were from rescue groups. The article does not address whether any cats with rabies have been imported, but cats are also capable of developing rabies.The article does state: ""In addition, although this report focuses on imported dogs and rabies, all animals pose a risk for transmission of zoonotic diseases (e.g., brucellosis, leishmaniasis, campylobacteriosis, leptospirosis, giardiasis, and cutaneous or visceral larva migrans). Documentation of overall health status, not just rabies vaccination, is critical to minimizing the risk from importing animals carrying zoonotic diseases.""There were concerns regarding this importation of a diseased animal that the New Jersey article did not mention nor did it point any reader to the original article from MMWR.I apologize for not referencing the MMWR article. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9990>.][See Also:Rabies - Americas (01): USA (NJ,VA) Canada (ON) 20160102.3906117].................................................tg/msp/mj/jw"
