Epoch Times [edited]<http://www.theepochtimes.com/n3/1933400-woman-dies-from-bird-flu-in-southern-china-a-second-woman-is-in-critical-condition/>After 9 cases of avian influenza A(H7N9), or bird flu, were reported in mainland China since last fall, 2 new cases of the A(H5N6) bird flu virus have now been identified in the country, resulting in one death so far.The 1st case was a 26-year-old woman from Shenzhen City, in Guangdong, the coastal province in Southeast China immediately north of Hong Kong. She had been exposed to live poultry and came down with symptoms on 24 Dec 2015. She was admitted to a hospital 3 days later and then died on 30 Dec [2015], at which point the case was reported to the World Health Organization.The 2nd case, reported to WHO on 2 Jan [2016], is a 40-year-old woman in Zhaoqing, Guangdong. She became ill on 22 Dec [2015] and was sent to a hospital on 28 Dec [2015], where she is isolated and in critical condition.Her history of exposure to live poultry is unknown, reported state-owned China News Service, which also reported that local officials inspected the poultry market and sellers and punished anyone not complying with sanitation and safety rules.Nearby Hong Kong and Taiwan have already issued alerts for travel to China.The Taiwan Centers for Disease Control issued tourism alerts for Zhejiang, Guangdong, Anhui, Hunan, and Shanghai.Hong Kong health officials said they will work closely with WHO and related sanitation departments to monitor the newest development. Disease prevention and control measures have been put in place at ports; thermal-imaging cameras will be used to examine people entering Hong Kong, and anyone suspected of abnormal body temperature will be rushed to a hospital.The 1st reported case of H5N6 virus in humans was found in China in May 2014. A 49-year-old man with a poultry farm in Sichuan Province died from severe pneumonia caused by the virus. WHO said he was likely infected by sick birds on his farm.Some strains of avian influenza can infect humans, usually in cases where they were exposed to infected birds. While some infections are fatal, many are mild and even subclinical in humans, says WHO.Patients who are infected can show symptoms of fever, cough, sore throat, eye infections, and in worse cases, pneumonia, and respiratory diseases, and other severe complications. To most people, the risk of contracting bird flu is very low, and it won't occur if poultry and eggs are properly handled.Still, authorities advise anyone visiting mainland China to keep good sanitation habits and avoid poultry farms, markets, and anywhere poultry may be slaughtered. Eggs and poultry products should be well-cooked before eating.[Byline: Juliet Song]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This report follows an earlier one 1st reporting the fatal case when she was in critical condition. The 2nd case appears to remain in critical condition; see ProMED-mail posting Avian influenza, human (02): China (GD) H5N6 20160105.3911192.The H5N6 flu virus has been detected in poultry in China, Laos and Viet Nam.WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid poultry farms, or contact with animals in live bird markets, or entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travellers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, in order to ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions (from <http://www.who.int/csr/don/4-january-2016-avian-influenza-china/en/>). - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>.]
