Disease Outbreak News [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/7-january-2016-mers-oman/en/>Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - Oman-------------------------On 3 Jan 2016, the National IHR Focal Point of Oman notified WHO of 1 additional case of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection. Details of the caseA 44-year-old male from the North Batinah Governorate developed symptoms on 25 Dec [2015] and, on 1 Jan [2016], was admitted to hospital. On 3 Jan [2016], the patient, who has no comorbidities, tested positive for MERS-CoV. Currently, he is in stable condition in a negative pressure isolation room on a ward. The patient has a history of exposure to dromedary camels in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. He has no history of exposure to other known risk factors in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. Contact tracing of household contacts is ongoing for the case. Investigation of camels is also ongoing. Globally, since September 2012, WHO has been notified of 1626 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV, including at least 586 related deaths. WHO adviceBased on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns. Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV are non-specific. Therefore, health-care workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures.Until more is understood about MERS-CoV, people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons are considered to be at high risk of severe disease from MERS‰Û CoV infection. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked. WHO remains vigilant and is monitoring the situation. Given the lack of evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission in the community, WHO does not recommend travel or trade restrictions with regard to this event. Raising awareness about MERS-CoV among travellers to and from affected countries is good public health practice.--Communicated by ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp[This report provides an update with details of the case reported in Oman by ProMED mail MERS-COV (01): Oman, Saudi Arabia 20160105.3911188. Since September 2012, WHO has been notified of 1626 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV (globally), 586 deaths related to MERS-CoV , and 26 countries with reported cases of MERS-CoV . A global map of countries reporting MERS can be accessed at  <http://www.who.int/emergencies/mers-cov/en/ > A map of Oman can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/124> - Mod.LK]
