Cebu Daily News [edited]<http://cebudailynews.inquirer.net/80772/80772>A 6-year-old boy died while his 2 siblings fell ill after eating boiled cassava in a case of suspected food poisoning in Dumanjug town, southwest Cebu. His siblings [aged 2 and 9] were 1st brought to Barili District Hospital, then moved to a hospital in Cebu City. The death occurred at about 4 am on Wednesday [6 Jan 2016], said PO1 Loreniel Labasa, desk officer of the Dumanjug Police Station.Labasa said the children ate boiled cassava at about 5 pm on Tuesday [5 Jan 2016]. 4 hours later, the children complained of stomach pains.However, the parents didn't bring them to the hospital immediately, said Labasa.[Byline: Jhunnex Napallacan, Rene F. Alima]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Cassava (_Manihot esculenta_) is a root crop widely consumed in Africa and South America. Although it originated in Brazil (where it is called manioc), it was brought to Africa by Portuguese colonists, and it is now an important crop there and in Indonesia and Southeast Asia. It is the principal source of nutrition for about 500 million people. Its leaves are edible, but the prize is its starchy root, rich in protein, minerals, and vitamins A, B, and C.Cassava is used in a vast variety of cakes, snacks, and desserts and grows wild in many places, being tough and drought-resistant. In a country where hunger is now a reality for many poor households, cassava is among those food crops that can make the crucial difference between starvation and survival. The cassava plant is the world's 3rd most important crop. Cassava enters the North American diet also -- as it is made into tapioca.Surprising for an important edible plant, cassava is quite poisonous without proper preparation. The toxin in cassava is called linamarin. When eaten raw or inadequately prepared, the human digestive system will convert this to cyanide. Even 2 cassava roots contain a fatal dose of poison. While the bitter variety (white cassava) of the plant has larger concentrations of cyanide than the sweet variety (yellow cassava), the sweet cassava is not without risk.To prepare cassava, it is peeled and grated and soaked in warm water for several days. This allows the cassava's own natural enzyme (linamarase) to convert the cyanogen linamarin to sugar and cyanide gas, and the volatile gas disperses usually harmlessly. However, women -- who are usually charged with processing the plant -- can be sickened by inhaling cyanide gas. What remains after processing can be boiled and eaten, or more usually, dried and ground.The shelf life of a cassava root is quite short once it is removed from the stem, so there's an urgency to get the food to market. Roots can turn to mush in less than a week. The rush to get cassava to the market may keep some batches of cassava from being processed properly.Chronic, low-level cyanide exposure is associated with the development of goiter and with tropical ataxic neuropathy, a nerve-damaging disorder that renders a person unsteady and uncoordinated. Severe cyanide poisoning, particularly during famines, when there is obviously pressure to process the cassava more rapidly, is associated with outbreaks of a debilitating, irreversible paralytic disorder called konzo and, in some cases, death. The incidence of konzo and tropical ataxic neuropathy can be as high as 3 percent in some areas of Africa.In an effort to avoid this toxicity, it has been reported by Siritunga and Sayre (1) that transgenic cassava free of cyanogens can be produced. The investigators generated transgenic plants in which cytochrome oxidase enzymes that catalyze the 1st step in linamarin synthesis are inhibited. The plants showed a 94-percent reduction in leaf linamarin content and a 99-percent decrease in root linamarin levels. Additionally, the same group (2) has reported that transgenic cassava plants can be produced that overexpress the gene for hydroxynitrile lyase, facilitating cyanogenesis during processing and producing a final product with less risk. The tubers of cassava do not have this enzyme, and processing relies on spontaneous conversion. Combining these methods could further decrease the risk of cyanide poisoning from cassava.References----------1. Siritunga D, Sayre RT: Generation of cyanogen-free transgenic cassava. Planta 2003; 217:367-73.2. Siritunga D, Arias-Garzon D, White W, Sayre RT: Over-expression of hydroxynitrile lyase in transgenic cassava roots accelerates cyanogenesis and food detoxification. Plant Biotechnol 2004; 2:37-43.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3443>.]
