New Vision [edited]<http://www.newvision.co.ug/new_vision/news/1414345/hepatitis-b-fight-parliament-pushes-increased-funding>Following pressure from legislators, the finance ministry has tasked the ministry of health with submitting a supplementary budget request for combating hepatitis B, which is killing many people in various parts of the country. The move was announced by the finance minister Matia Kasaija after many MPs had expressed dismay that government is not doing enough to save the lives of Ugandans who are dying from the epidemic.""At the ministry of finance, we value life. We are ready to frontload all the money that was budgeted for hepatitis B vaccines.  We are even ready to grant a supplementary budget request for combating the epidemic,"" Kasaija said while responding to criticisms from legislators that  his ministry is not treating hepatitis as a national emergency that requires urgent attention.Hepatitis B is a potentially deadly infectious disease caused by the hepatitis B virus, which affects the liver and is spread like HIV/AIDS through contact with the blood or body fluids of an infected person. The disease is best controlled through vaccination.Raising it as a matter of national concern, Busongora North MP William Nzoghu reported to the house that the disease has killed over 30 people in his Rwenzori region in the last 3 weeks. Terego County MP Kassiano Wadri said 14 percent of the people in Northern Uganda are suffering from hepatitis B.Padyere County MP Joshua Anywarach said, ""It is sad that out of 112 districts, only 12 districts have been catered for. I hope Nebbi is among them. There is a village in Nebbi where every day we bury someone who has died of hepatitis B."" Agago woman MP Franca Akello said, ""Our people especially in in Acholi, Lango, West Nile, and Teso are greatly hit by hepatitis B. People are dying every day. Government should handle this epidemic as a national crisis.""[Byline: Moses Mulondo, Henry Sekanjako]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Hepatitis B can be transmitted sexually, especially during acute infection or when chronic hepatitis B carriers are HBeAg positive and an unregulated sex industry along a transportation route serves to transmit HBV as well as syphilis, gonorrhea and HIV. It is not clearly stated if the deaths were alleged to be from acute or chronic HBV infection.  Acute fulminant HBV infection is uncommon, and deaths from chronic hepatitis B are related to the complications of liver cirrhosis including hepatocellular carcinoma. Chronic HBV infection can be treated, but cure rates are not high and require long-term therapy. The best way of preventing HBV transmission involves universal immunization with the subunit vaccine, barrier protection for sexual exposure and screening of blood and blood products for transfusion. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/97>.]
