The Tribune, Tribune News Service [edited]<http://www.tribuneindia.com/news/himachal/jaundice-cases-mount-to-500-in-shimla/180306.html>More than 500 cases of jaundice have been reported in the city [Shimla, Himachal Pradesh] in the past few weeks.Both Indira Gandhi Medical College (IGMC) and Hospital and Deen Dayal Upadhyay (Ripon) Hospital are receiving about 40 cases every day.The Shimla Municipal Corporation [SMC] has attributed the jaundice outbreak to sewage contamination in Ashwani Khud, which supplies potable water to 1/3 of the city's population.Most of the jaundice cases have been reported from Chotta Shimla, Panthaghati, Vikas Nagar, New Shimla, and Kasumpti, a health officer said. Patients suffering from jaundice are also from the suburbs of Sanjauli, Dhalli, and other parts of the city, the health officer added.According to doctors, hepatitis E virus infection is due to contamination of potable water. The Ripon hospital is receiving about 20-25 patients of jaundice daily for past 15 days while the IGMC has received about 12-15 cases every day.Jaundice is caused by [among other pathogens,] the hepatitis E virus, said Dr Ranjna Rao, Chief Medical Officer (CMO), Shimla. ""Patients are being advised to drink boiled water and have a non-fried diet,"" said Dr Ramesh Chand, Medical Superintendent, IGMC.The city witnessed a rise in jaundice cases since the last week of December [2015]. ""My daughter is suffering from jaundice for the past few days,"" said a resident of Chhota Shimla.""Once a patient begins to have a boiled diet, the virus cycle gets over and the patient is normalised,"" said Dr Ramesh Chand.Deputy Mayor Tikender Panwar said effluents from the sewerage treatment plant in Malyana, located the vicinity of the Ashwani Khud drinking water scheme, was mainly responsible for water contamination.He said he had lodged a criminal negligence complaint with the police against a contractor of the treatment plant on [Tue 5 Jan 2016]. The contractor has been accused of discharging sewage in the rivulet without treating it. Panwar said the government-run treatment plant uses an outdated technology for reusing the water.Sounding a note of caution, Panwar said the testing of potable water for virus causing hepatitis is not done as there is no such laboratory in the state. He said quality of water supplied from the Ashwani Khud is not good, which is causing repeated epidemic in Shimla.In 2007, 2010 and 2013, a large number people in the town tested positive for hepatitis E, a liver problem caused by the consumption of water contaminated by sewerage.Meanwhile, Irrigation and Public Health Minister Vidya Stokes said the government had taken preventive steps to check the further spread of jaundice.She said the water supply from the Ashwani Khud had been temporarily shut off until the mixing of untreated water from the sewage treatment plant [has been stopped].--Communicated by:ProMED-SoAs<promed@promedmail.org>[The following discussion (with the citations removed) regarding various strains is from Kamar N, Bendall R, Florence Legrand-Abravanel F, et al: Hepatitis E. Lancet 2012;379: 2477-2488:""Molecular characterization of various HEV [hepatitis E virus] strains circulating among human beings and animals has led to the recognition of 4 major genotypes, representing a single serotype. HEV1 and HEV2 are restricted to human beings and transmitted via contaminated water in developing countries. HEV1 occurs mainly in Asia, and HEV2 in Africa and Mexico. HEV3 and HEV4 infect human beings, pigs, and other mammalian species and are responsible for sporadic cases of autochthonous hepatitis E in both developing and developed countries. HEV3 has a worldwide distribution. By contrast, HEV4 mostly occurs in southeast Asia, but has recently been isolated in European pigs. Although HEV3 and HEV4 infections have been linked to the consumption of raw or undercooked pork or game meat, the full range of species that are reservoirs for HEV is still unknown. On the basis of full-length genome-sequence analyses, HEV genotypes have recently been characterized in rats in Germany, wild boars in Japan, and farmed rabbits in China. HEV1 can be classified into 5 subgenotypes, HEV2 into 2, HEV3 into 3, and HEV4 into 7. Phylogenetic analyses show that HEV subgenotypes circulating in human beings and animals in the same area are closely related, supporting zoonotic transmission. Studies of the evolutionary history and population dynamics of HEV show that HEV has evolved through a series of steps, in which the ancestors of HEV might have adapted to a succession of animal hosts leading to human beings.""Although generally considered to cause only acute infection, the review article also discusses chronic hepatitis E, which is defined by persisting HEV RNA in serum or stools for 6 months or more, in immunosuppressed patients. Most cases have occurred in solid-organ-transplant recipients. Additionally, a few cases have been reported in individuals with HIV and patients with hematological disorders receiving chemotherapy. Chronic infection with HEV1 or HEV2 has not been reported.Hepatitis E virus (HEV), which is transmitted via the fecal-oral route, is the commonest cause of acute viral hepatitis globally. Large HEV outbreaks have been documented in crowded settings that have poor water, sanitation, and hygiene conditions. Pregnant women suffer disproportionately high mortality from hepatitis E.A recombinant, 3-dose series HEV vaccine has been produced but has not yet been pre-qualified by WHO. The vaccine has been shown to prevent symptomatic HEV infection and proven to be safe and effective in people aged 16-64 years. Limited vaccine safety data in 37 pregnant women receiving 57 doses have been reported; however, further research is needed, and safety for children is unknown. The vaccine is expected to be protective against HEV genotype 1, the strain associated with most waterborne outbreaks in Africa and Asia. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/304>.]
