Deseret News [edited]<http://www.deseretnews.com/article/865644897/Investigation-finds-more-cases-of-hepatitis-C-at-McKay-Dee-Davis-hospitals.html?pg=all>Investigation finds more cases of hepatitis C at McKay-Dee, Davis hospitals--------------2 months after health officials began investigating how a patient at McKay-Dee Hospital contracted hepatitis C, the Utah Department of Health is confirming more patients have since tested positive for the virus. Angela Dunn, a medical epidemiologist with the CDC stationed at the Utah Department of Health, confirmed that additional cases have been identified but said health officials would not be releasing the final numbers until the investigation is complete.Hospital officials asked nearly 7200 patients at McKay-Dee Hospital in Ogden and Davis Hospital and Medical Center in Layton to get tested for hepatitis C in November 2015 after a former nurse and a patient both tested positive for the same rare strain of hepatitis C. Authorities are concerned that the 49-year-old former nurse, of Layton, may have exposed patients to the virus.Chris Dallin, a spokesman for McKay-Dee Hospital, declined to confirm the existence of additional cases until the health department completes its report. That will likely be in February 2016, he said, after hospital officials finish processing the last of the free hepatitis C tests being offered to  patients until 31 Jan 2016.Hepatitis C, a virus that attacks the liver, is transmitted through contact with infected blood, typically by sharing needles. In recent years, several high-profile hepatitis C outbreaks have involved hospital workers exposing patients to the bloodborne pathogen after tampering with injection equipment to steal narcotics. In 2009, a Denver hospital technician infected at least 18 patients with hepatitis C after she stole syringes of pain medication and swapped them with used syringes containing saline.The former McKay-Dee nurse now at the center of the investigation, lost her nursing license in December 2014 after admitting to stealing medication from her employer, according to licensing division documents. Dallin said the former nurse in was fired from McKay-Dee in 2014 after the hospital found evidence she had stolen morphine and Dilaudid, both opioid pain medications.Authorities expanded the investigation to include patients at Davis Hospital and Medical Center after they learned that the nurse was caught stealing IV Benadryl from the hospital while employed there in 2012 and 2013.Health officials are still calling on patients who received letters about their possible exposure to come in for testing.Chris Johnson, chief nursing officer at Davis Hospital and Medical Center, said in a prepared statement the hospital has had ""nearly 50 percent of all those exposed tested."" Dunn estimated the response rate was closer to 35 percent overall. That's still ""pretty low,"" she said.She warned that hepatitis C usually lies dormant for years, but it can lead to severe liver damage, liver cancer and liver failure if left untreated.Dunn said the additional patients identified have the same strain of hepatitis C as the former nurse and the 1st patient, lending more credibility to the possibility that the infections come from a common source. Genotype 2b is found in about 8 percent of people with hepatitis C, Dunn said.[Byline: Daphne Chen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from Healthmap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED awaits definitive numbers related to patients thought to have been nosocomially infected.Bloodborne viruses such as hepatitis B and C and HIV can be transmitted by the contamination of multidose vials with a syringe containing blood harboring the virus. If the viruses are genetically identical, not just the same genotype, this suggests that the patient was injected by a syringe containing the medicine (likely a strong analgesic, such as an opiate, that had been previously contaminated by the healthcare worker's blood).Regarding the significance of genotypes of HCV, the following is derived from a USA Veterans Administration publication <http://www.hepatitis.va.gov/provider/reviews/genotypes.asp#S1X> [the comments about response to therapy also relate to the newer anti-HCV modes of therapy]:An important variable for all patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the ""genotype"" of HCV with which they are infected. This is the strain of the virus to which they were exposed when they were infected, often many years prior to their evaluation, and it is determined by a simple blood test. Genotypes of HCV are genetically distinct groups of the virus that have arisen during its evolution (1). Approximately 75 percent of Americans with HCV have genotype 1 of the virus (subtypes 1a or 1b), and 20-25 percent have genotypes 2 or 3, with small numbers of patients infected with genotypes 4, 5, or 6 (2). Most patients with HCV are found to have only 1 principal genotype, rather than multiple genotypes (3-5). Genotype 4 is much more common in Africa than in many other parts of the world, genotype 6 is common in Southeast Asia, and each area of the world has its own distribution of genotypes (6).Genotype generally has not been found in epidemiological studies to play a large role in liver disease progression due to HCV. Rather, genotype is of clinical importance principally as a factor in response to HCV treatments. With all treatments tested to date, patients with genotypes 2 and 3 are more than twice as likely as patients with genotype 1 to achieve a sustained virological response to therapy (2-5, 7). In addition, when using combination therapy with interferon and ribavirin, patients with genotypes 2 or 3 generally are treated for only 24 weeks, whereas it is recommended that patients infected with genotype 1 receive treatment for 48 weeks.1. Bukh J, Miller R, Purcell R: Genetic heterogeneity of hepatitis C virus: quasispecies and genotypes. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:41-632. McHutchison JG, Gordon SC, Schiff ER, et al: Interferon alfa-2b alone or in combination with ribavirin as initial treatment for chronic hepatitis C. N Engl J Med 1998; 339:1485-1492.3. Manns MP, McHutchison JG, Gordon SC, et al: Peginterferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin compared with interferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin for initial treatment of chronic hepatitis C: a randomized trial. Lancet 2001; 358:958-965.4. Fried MW, Shiffman ML, Reddy R, et al; Peginterferon alfa-2a plus ribavirin for chronic hepatitis C virus infection. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:975-982.5. Hadziyannis SJ, Sette H Jr, Morgan TR, et al: Peginterferon alpha-2a and ribavirin combination therapy in chronic hepatitis C: a randomized study of treatment duration and ribavirin dose. Ann Intern Med 2004; 140:346-355.6. Simmonds P: Genetic diversity and evolution of hepatitis C virus - 15 years on. J Gen Virol. 2004;85:3173-88.7. Zeuzem S. Heterogeneous virologic response rates to interferon-based therapy in patients with chronic hepatitis C: who responds less well? Ann Intern Med 2004; 140:370-381. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/246>.]
