Miami (FL) Herald (editorial) [edited]<http://www.miamiherald.com/opinion/letters-to-the-editor/article53594410.html>The drug-abuse epidemic has caused widespread problems in Florida. As president of the Hepatitis Education Awareness and Liver Support (HEALS) Group of the South, one of the problems I encounter is the increasing number of drug users contracting hepatitis C due to the sharing of needles.Hepatitis C (HCV) is the most common chronic blood-borne disease, accounting for a large percentage of chronic liver disease. It's a leading cause of death in Florida. At least 60 percent of HCV cases are caused by injection drug use, the CDC says.In Florida, the number of cases of HCV increased 133 percent between 2009 and 2013. There's no doubt this is linked to the increased rate of drug abuse. We need to increase awareness around the issue of needle sharing and implement more tools to fight against users injecting drugs in the 1st place. One preventative measure is making available opioids with abuse-deterrent properties (OADP), which are prescription painkillers that are nearly impossible to melt and inject. Because opiate use accounts for a large percentage of injection drug use, OADPs could help to limit the HCV cases and have been proven to curb abuse.I call upon Florida's lawmakers to adopt OADP in 2016 to fight drug abuse and the spread of HCV, which will save lives.[Pam Langford, President, HEALS of the South,Tallahassee, FL]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Nguyen V, Raffa RB, Taylor R, Pergolizzi JV Jr: The role of abuse-deterrent formulations in countering opioid misuse and abuse. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2015 Nov 23. doi: 10.1111/jcpt.12337. [Epub ahead of print]Abstract""WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Pain is a prevalent and, due to the ageing population, increasing medical problem. Opioids are frequently prescribed to meet the unmet medical need. Unfortunately, with the increase in the legitimate use of opioids, there has been a corresponding increase in abuse. A practical way to retain the pain relief afforded by opioids while decreasing opportunities for abuse is to make it more difficult to extract the opioid from the product or to make it less desirable to do so by designing an abuse-deterrent formulation (ADF). We provide a brief overview of the strategies and early evidence related to opioid ADFs.METHODS: Published and unpublished literature, websites, and other sources were searched for current opioid formulation options, including immediate-release and extended-release products. Each was summarized, reviewed and assessed.RESULTS: The strategies that have been used to design the current opioid ADFs involve one or more of 4 approaches: a physical barrier; incorporation of an opioid receptor antagonist (e.g. naloxone) that self-limits opioid action when taken in excess amount; inclusion of a noxious agent that is released during inappropriate use; or a pro-drug.WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSIONS: Legitimate use of opioid analgesics carries with it certain risks, including the risk of abuse. The new ADFs utilize 4 major strategies and provide innovative additions to the armamentarium. They likely will become an important part of a comprehensive approach to limiting, although not eliminating, opioid misuse and abuse.""Although these various opioid APF approaches have potential, below is a 2012 letter to the editor which points out a potential flaw in one form of APF:Cicero TJ, Ellis MS, Surratt HL: Effect of Abuse-Deterrent Formulation of OxyContin. N Engl J Med 2012; 367:187-189 <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmc1204141>To the Editor:""In August 2010, an abuse-deterrent formulation of the widely abused prescription opioid OxyContin was introduced. The intent was to make OxyContin more difficult to solubilize or crush, thus discouraging abuse through injection and inhalation. We examined the effect of the abuse-deterrent formulation on the abuse of OxyContin and other opioids.Data were collected quarterly from 1 Jul 2009 through 31 Mar 2012 with the use of self-administered surveys that were completed anonymously by independent cohorts of 2566 patients with opioid dependence, as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition, who were entering treatment programs around the United States and for whom a prescription opioid was the primary drug of abuse (i.e., heroin use was acceptable but could not be the patient's primary drug). Of these patients, 103 agreed to online or telephone interviews to gather qualitative information in order to amplify and interpret findings from the structured national survey.As shown in Figure 1 [for figures, see original URL - Mod.LL], the selection of OxyContin as a primary drug of abuse decreased from 35.6 percent of respondents before the release of the abuse-deterrent formulation to just 12.8 percent 21 months later (P less than 0.001). Simultaneously, selection of hydrocodone and other oxycodone agents increased slightly, whereas for other opioids, including high-potency fentanyl and hydromorphone, selection rose markedly, from 20.1 percent to 32.3 percent (P=0.005). Of all opioids used to ""get high in the past 30 days at least once"" (Figure 1B), OxyContin fell from 47.4 percent of respondents to 30.0 percent (P less than 0.001), whereas heroin use nearly doubled.Interviews with patients who abused both formulations of OxyContin indicated a unanimous preference for the older version. Although 24 percent found a way to defeat the tamper-resistant properties of the abuse-deterrent formulation, 66 percent indicated a switch to another opioid, with ""heroin"" the most common response. These changes appear to be causally linked, as typified by one response: ""Most people that I know don't use OxyContin to get high anymore. They have moved on to heroin [because] it is easier to use, much cheaper, and easily available."" It is important to note that there was no evidence that OxyContin abusers ceased their drug abuse as a result of the abuse-deterrent formulation. Rather, it appears that they simply shifted their drug of choice.Our data show that an abuse-deterrent formulation successfully reduced abuse of a specific drug but also generated an unanticipated outcome: replacement of the abuse-deterrent formulation with alternative opioid medications and heroin, a drug that may pose a much greater overall risk to public health than OxyContin. Thus, abuse-deterrent formulations may not be the ""magic bullets"" that many hoped they would be in solving the growing problem of opioid abuse.""Clearly a multipronged approach to this extremely important problem is needed. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/212>.]
