Australian Broadcasting Corporation [edited]<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-05/wa-health-warns-whooping-cough-outbreak-imminent/7068350>An outbreak of the potentially deadly whooping cough (pertussis) disease may be imminent, West Australian health authorities have warned, as they urge pregnant women to get vaccinated. According to the WA Centre for Disease Control (CDC), the rate of weekly pertussis notifications steadily increased over 2015, which the department fears points to another outbreak being due.The bacterial infection, which is passed on by sneezing and coughing, is always present in Western Australia but outbreaks occur in roughly 3- to 5-year cycles. There were 1784 cases in the state in 2015, up from 1753 in 2014. The last big spike in cases was in 2011, with 4005 recorded, up from 1446 in 2010.The CDC has issued a warning that newborns will be particularly at risk, with more than 80 percent of deaths from the disease occurring in children less than 3 months of age.Pregnant women are being urged to get vaccinated in their 3rd trimester, so antibodies can be transferred to the baby in utero to protect it in the first few months after birth. Babies cannot be fully vaccinated in the 1st few months.Dr Paul Effler from the Department of Health's Communicable Disease Control Directorate said 80 percent of pertussis deaths occurred in infants under 3 months. ""What we want to do is get to the pregnant women, so they get vaccinated and they pass that protection to the baby in their body and when the child is born then they're protected when they are most vulnerable,"" he said. ""We're not saying the sky is falling.We're seeing increased whooping cough activity and we want to make sure parents are aware of it, so they can make sure their kids are protected and so that pregnant women get vaccinated to protect that baby when they're most vulnerable.""Following the death of a 1-month-old baby in March 2015 after contracting the disease, the Western Australian Government began offering free vaccinations to pregnant women. The death was the 1st since 2011, but in the 3 years before that, an infant died from the infection every year.According to the WA Department of Health, UK studies showed vaccinating women in the 3rd trimester of pregnancy can prevent more than 90 percent of infections among infants in the 1st few months of life.[Byline: Rebecca Trigger]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org> [Neonatal pertussis is observed to be especially severe, with as much as a 3 percent risk of death. Symptoms can be substantially different, with periods of apnea (breathing arrest) sometimes with seizures induced by hypoxia (low oxygen), usually the most common manifestation of infection. The cough is present but so weak that it may be unrecognized. In these children with so-called malignant pertussis, leukocytosis (particularly with white blood cell counts of 30 000 to 100 000) and severe pulmonary hypertension are ominous signs of mortality.In a study comparing neonatal pertussis to other neonatal respiratory infections, pertussis-positive neonates had longer hospital stays, less fever, more apnea and cyanosis spells, required more days of supplemental oxygen in the hospital, and represented a large proportion of infants discharged on respiratory supportive care.A 2014 publication confirms the safety of maternal pertussis immunization: Kharbanda EO, Vazquez-Benitez G, Lipkind HS, et al: Evaluation of the association of maternal pertussis vaccination with obstetric events and birth outcomes. JAMA. 2014; 312(18): 1897-904 (<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1930817>). - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/289>.]
