The Northern Echo [edited]<http://www.thenorthernecho.co.uk/news/14194616.Police_warning_over__legal_highs__after_seven_people_fall_ill/>Police have warned people about the dangers of taking so called legal highs after 7 people fell ill in Newcastle. It is believed they had been taking a substance called Exodus, also known as Red-X.Police said they had attended 4 incidents in the West End of the city on Sunday [10 Jan 2015] evening, with those involved aged between 23 and 47.Chief Inspector Dave Gould said: ""Thankfully, those involved haven't suffered any serious damage, but that's not to say the use of legal highs can't have a more devastating impact on people's health. They can cause symptoms ranging from reduced inhibitions, drowsiness, excited or paranoid states, unconsciousness and seizures. These risks are increased if mixed with alcohol or other stimulants and in extreme cases can prove fatal.""[Byline: Stuart Arnold]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Any mixture of drugs, including those prescribed by a physician, can have adverse effects. Alcohol and drugs are a mixture that can have deleterious effects.Legal highs are a broad combination of drugs sometimes consisting of marijuana, cocaine and a depressant or some ""upper,"" perhaps including caffeine and even ecstasy. These combinations are usually in groupings of 3, but there can be more in the concoction. Sometimes, these combinations have included synthetic marijuana or other synthetic drugs, which may change the ""high"" effect but can also make them more deadly. ""Legal highs"" is a general street drug term, but it in no way makes them legal. Cynically, most legal highs such as these are marked ""not for human consumption,"" weasel-words when human consumption is exactly what these goods are intended for.Many ""green front"" stores have been opening up in the UK. By some counts, over 200 of the ""green stores"" opened up in 2015 alone. The purpose of these stores is to sell such ""legal highs"" drugs. Many of these products are marked as ""smoke-able incense or smoke-able herbal mixes and have names that sound innocuous to the unsuspecting. The term legal highs arose from the issue that the green stores appear to be legal, selling incense and herbs.Most of these drug combinations are mixed or prepared by unlicensed chemists or unregistered pharmacists, assuming they may actually be a pharmacist. These combinations of drugs are sold by the mixers in the green stores as herbal incense, which is intended to be smoked and falls under the heading of legal highs. People have been seriously affected from these smokeable incenses, causing a number to be hospitalized in critical to fatal condition.Sadly, victims of all ages report they thought it was safe because it was legal to purchase. Hence, the misnomer name of legal highs. Likewise, these victims are essentially guinea pigs for the individuals doing the drug mixing. If one causes death or a serious reaction, then the mixer may adjust their mixture to achieve their high goal, or, in some cases, their goal may be the death of the individual.These ""legal highs"" may have different names from illegal street drugs, but they work by stimulating the same chemical receptors in the brain as those affected by heroin, ecstasy and cocaine. The synthetic stimulants, for example, trigger the release of dopamine, the chemical that controls the nervous system, producing a massive increase in heart rate and blood pressure. The consequence is hospitalization or death, and even hospitalization may fail to save some individuals.Claims that legal highs are non-addictive have been doubted after a group of rhesus monkeys which were fed the chemicals in legal highs repeatedly made use of a mechanism which allowed them to self-administer further doses. The test results showed the effects were exactly the same as those seen in cocaine addicts. Consequently, these seemingly ""legal drugs"" are inherently more lethal than other dugs. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>.]
