Energetic City [edited]<http://energeticcity.ca/article/news/2016/01/11/90973>Northern Health has confirmed that they are monitoring an increase in hepatitis A cases in Dawson Creek, along with the BC Centre for Disease Control. ""At this time, we're still investigating the sources of hepatitis A and have declared an outbreak as we determine the source for the seemingly unrelated clusters recently identified,"" stated Jonathan Dyck with Northern Health.The health unit is asking people to take the necessary precautions to prevent the spread of hepatitis A, a crucial one of which being routine hand washing. ""Thorough hand washing after visits to the restroom, before touching food or drink, and after changing a baby's diaper can assist in mitigating spread."" They also inform the public that there is a vaccination available for hepatitis A.Anyone who feels sick is encouraged to stay at home, and Northern Health says to speak to your family physician, contact HealthLink BC at 8-1-1, or call your local public health office if you are experiencing any symptoms of hepatitis A.Hepatitis A is a viral infection of the liver; typically the virus is ingested by mouth from fecal-contaminated food or drink but can be contracted through close contact with an infected person. Northern Health says there are a variety of symptoms, including fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, abdominal discomfort, and jaundice. Symptoms can last for several weeks, but do not normally last more than 2 months.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[An epidemiologic chart of the cases over time could indicate whether these cases represent a point-source exposure in time or a continuing risk situation. Many cases of hepatitis A infection are totally subclinical (asymptomatic) or anicteric (nausea, vomiting, right upper abdominal discomfort but no jaundice), so it would be quite interesting to perform hepatitis A IgM and IgG antibody screening on the cohort population. Finding detectable IgM anti-HAV antibody in someone who has not just been immunized implies recent or ongoing infection even with minimal or no elevations of liver aminotransferase enzymes in the blood (the enzyme rise occurs with hepatic cell damage). IgG anti-HAV alone suggest remote infection or immunization.Universal immunization for HAV in childhood could prevent such outbreaks. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/264>.]
