USA Today [edited]<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2016/01/15/military-bioterrorism-lab-safety/78752876/>The new Army report [see moderator comments section below] provides troubling details about lax operations at Dugway [Proving Ground, Utah] as staff worked with some of the world's most deadly pathogens and nerve agents.No illnesses resulted from the Dugway anthrax shipments, which were among a series of high-profile incidents at federal labs since 2014. A USA Today Network investigation published last year [2015] found hundreds of additional accidents with dangerous pathogens at corporate, university, government and military labs nationwide -- and a system of self-policing and fragmented oversight that obscures failings by facilities and regulators.The review is the latest to examine how a research facility at Dugway could have mistakenly shipped live anthrax specimens -- labeled as killed -- for more than a decade to unsuspecting researchers developing detection equipment and diagnostic tests against bioweapons. The live anthrax ended up at nearly 200 private, academic and federal labs located in every state plus 9 foreign countries.Dugway's failures to fully kill anthrax specimens with radiation went undetected for more than a decade by military officials and federal lab inspectors from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It was only discovered last May [2015], when a private biotech firm that received some of Dugway's purportedly killed anthrax specimens did their own tests and found the spores could still grow.Dugway's authority to work with any potential bioterror pathogens remains suspended by the CDC. And in an interview with USA Today, Lt. Gen. Thomas Spoehr said Dugway will no longer be allowed to produce pathogen specimens for shipment to other facilities.""They will make what they need for their own internal testing purposes,"" Spoehr said, ""but they will not be an exporter of biological products for the greater world or anybody else other than for Dugway's internal use.""Spoehr said all of the Pentagon's biodefense labs remain under a self-imposed research moratorium while a new, unified lab oversight structure is put in place and protocols for working safely with pathogens are standardized and undergo scientific review. The process, especially creating verified kill methods for anthrax specimens -- plus reliable tests to verify the spores are dead -- could take another year, Army officials said.Restarting the biodefense research is critical in developing a wide range of tests and equipment to protect against deadly pathogens, such as those that cause Ebola, plague, botulism and anthrax, said Maj. Gen. Brian Lein, commander of the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command. ""We have to do this to protect our troops going into harm's way,"" he said.The new accountability review highlights this mistaken shipment of live anthrax, which the report said went to the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories, as one of several red flags that should have triggered wider safety reviews and action years ago by Dugway's own leadership.[Byline: Alison Young, Tom Vanden Brook]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The following is an edited unclassified summary of the AR [Army Regulation] 15-6 Investigation Report dated 17 Dec 2015. The full executive summary, communicated by Michael P. Owen, <owenmp@seanet.com>, can be found at: <http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2691592-Dugway-Proving-Ground-Anthrax-Shipment-AR-15-6.html>.Background----------On 22 May 2015, a private company notified the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that it found a low concentration of viable (live) _Bacillus anthracis_ spores in a shipment from the U.S. Army that should have only contained non-viable (dead) spores. The CDC notified the Department of Defense (DoD) of this unauthorized shipment of viable _Bacillus anthracis_ and determined that the material originated at Dugway Proving Ground (DPG), Utah. As a result, the CDC and the DoD investigated DPG's history of _Bacillus anthracis_ inactivation and determined that between 2004 and 2015, the Life Sciences Division at DPG (DPG-LSD) prepared a total of 86 lots of inactivated _Bacillus anthracis_, in support of the Critical Reagents Program (CRP) at Fort Detrick, Maryland. The CRP serves as a source for biological materials (such as inactivated _Bacillus anthracis_) used to develop countermeasures required to protect U.S. military forces from biological threats. The CRP maintains its Antigen Repository at DPG-LSD. The CRP routinely directs the shipment of biological materials produced at the Antigen Repository at DPG-LSD to external government and commercial laboratories involved in countermeasure development. The CRP Antigen Repository is the only DoD laboratory engaged in large-scale production and shipping of select agents to external entities.At the time of production, DPG-LSD conducted viability testing that demonstrated that no live _Bacillus anthracis_ remained, so a death certificate was issued for each of these 86 lots. Following the 22 May 2015 discovery by the private company, DPG-LSD used a newly developed CDC protocol to re-test the viability of the lots of inactivated _Bacillus anthracis_ remaining in its inventory (33 of the original 86). Results showed that 17 of the 33 lots contained low concentrations of viable spores. It is still unclear whether or not this newly developed testing protocol would have identified the live _Bacillus anthracis_ had DPG-LSD utilized it when originally conducting the viability test, or if some unknown scientific phenomenon allowed the spores to ""heal"" in the intervening time period. Ultimately, CDC, with support from DoD, determined that over a 12-year period samples from these 17 lots had been sent to 194 laboratories in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, 3 territories and 9 foreign countries.In response, DoD instituted a variety of measures to safeguard public health, including directing a 30-day review of the DoD's safety practices for generating and handling inactivated _Bacillus anthracis_. The findings of this 30-day review were documented in a report on 13 Jul 2015 (Review Committee Report: Inadvertent shipment of live Bacillus anthracis spores by DoD). On 23 Jul 2015, DoD issued a moratorium on the shipment of inactivated _Bacillus anthracis_. The Secretary of the Army, in an abundance of caution, subsequently directed safety reviews at all Army laboratories working with _Bacillus anthracis_ and other deadly pathogens. He expanded the DoD moratorium to include all biological select agents and toxins (not just _Bacillus anthracis_). He also directed the formation of 2 teams to address this situation. One team, led by LTG Thomas Spoehr, was tasked to prepare a comprehensive implementation plan to address the findings and recommendations of the 13 Jul 2015 DoD report. The 2nd team, led by MG Paul Ostrowski, was tasked with conducting an investigation, under Army Regulation 15-6, into the facts and circumstances that contributed to the unintended and unacknowledged shipment of viable _Bacillus anthracis_ spores from DPG-LSD.The 15-6 investigation team reviewed the reports prepared by the CDC and DoD. The team developed an investigative plan and visited laboratories at the Edgewood Chemical and Biological Center (ECBC) and the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) to obtain a basic understanding of the science, organizational structure, and functions at 2 of the primary facilities working with _Bacillus anthracis_. From 17-21 Aug 2015 the team traveled to DPG-LSD to gather evidence. During the evidence gathering process, the 15-6 investigation team conducted environmental sampling and found contamination outside of primary containment in one of the laboratories at DPG-LSD. The CDC was notified, and in response conducted a re-inspection of DPG-LSD on 27-28 Aug 2015. On 28 Aug 2015, CDC suspended the certificate of registration for DPG-LSD to possess, use, and transfer _Bacillus anthracis_ and directed that all _Bacillus anthracis_ in DPG-LSD's possession be securely stored to prevent theft, loss, or release. On 31 Aug 2015, CDC suspended DPG-LSD's certificate of registration for all select agents. The remainder of this Executive Summary focuses on the findings and recommendations of the 15-6 investigation. All references to DPG and DPG-LSD leadership and management address only the specific individuals identified in the findings and recommendations of the 15-6 report of investigation.Summary-------The preponderance of the evidence does not support a finding that any individual or institutional failure was directly responsible for the unauthorized shipment of low concentrations of viable _Bacillus anthracis_. However, several scientific knowledge gaps, institutional concerns, and individual failures may have been contributing factors. Details are provided in the full report. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
