KOB4 [edited]<http://www.kob.com/article/stories/s4017810.shtml#.Vpko7hXhDIU>The city of Santa Fe sent a public notice Thursday [14 Jan 2016] warning that plague has been confirmed in pets that may be because they visited La Tierra Trails.A Department of Health spokesman said a ""couple"" of dogs tested positive for plague and that the dogs had recently been hiking at the La Tierra Trails. The dogs were treated and recovered.The city did not release further information but warned not to touch or let your pet come into contact with sick or dead animals and to make sure they are treated for fleas.Contact your veterinarian if your pet is sick and call a doctor if you become ill.--Communicated by:Promed mail from Healthmap alerts[Plague is transmitted by fleas. There are several forms of plague in human beings: bubonic, septicemic and pneumonic.Plague, caused by _Yersinia pestis_, is enzootic among rodents in the western United States. Humans can be infected through 1) the bite of an infected flea carried by a rodent or, rarely, other animals; 2) direct contact with contaminated tissues; or 3) in rare cases, inhalation of respiratory secretions from infected people or animals.Plague is a potential bioterrorism agent. Human infections are rare but can be life-threatening. The case fatality rate of plague depends on the clinical presentation (that is, bubonic, septicemic, or pneumonic) and timing of initiation of antibiotic therapy; if untreated, the case fatality rate is over 50 per cent for bubonic plague and approaches 100 per cent for pneumonic plague. Rapid laboratory identification can help guide therapy.Domestic cats and dogs can also contract plague from infective fleas. They may carry infected fleas home to their owners. Cats may serve as a direct source of infection. There are many flea treatments and repellents appropriate for pets available. Some products may be suitable for dogs but not cats, or may be suitable for an adult but not a younger animal. Be sure to consult your veterinarian, as some products may be toxic to cats, kittens, and puppies, even resulting in fatalities.Clinical signs in pets involve a localized swelling, such as under the jaw in cats, but also in the inguinal region or under the front leg (the armpit, if you will), lethargy, anorexia, and fever. These clinical signs may be present in the dog as well. Swelling under the jaw in cats is frequently mistaken as a cat fight abscess.. Please take your pet to a veterinarian if you notice any abnormalities.Veterinarians should protect themselves by wearing gloves when examining these swellings. A bubo that ruptures may infect the veterinarian or even the pet owner if the pet owner is the one palpating the swelling.Another form of the disease is the respiratory form. Cats may acquire this form and can spread it to their owners or the veterinarians through infected expiratory droplets. People are also prone to the respiratory infection.You should also be aware that the fleas that hitchhike into the home via a pet vehicle can also transmit disease to you, the owner, or caretaker of the pet. Sleeping in the same bed with dogs has been associated with plague in enzootic areas. Plague patients with no history of exposure to rodents can be infected by _Y. pestis_ if their pets carry infected rodent fleas into the home. Veterinarians always should recommend flea control to dog and cat owners.Parts of this comment have been excerpted from: CDC. Notes from the field: two cases of human plague -- Oregon, 2010. MMWR, 25 Feb 2011; 60(07);214 <http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6007a4.htm>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/233>.]
