NPR [edited]<http://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2016/01/14/462964602/five-mysteries-about-ebola-from-bats-to-eyeballs-to-blood>5 mysteries about Ebola: From bats to eyeballs to blood----------[National Public Radio (NPR) asked Dr. Daniel Bausch - an expert on Ebola virus disease (EVD) who is working with the World Health Organization (WHO) - to list the top-5 unknowns of the disease.Q: How EVD reached West Africa? A: Researchers were able to use genetic sequencing to determine that the West Africa outbreak was started when a young boy in Guinea was infected in December 2013, likely from a fruit bat.  Q: Why do so many Ebola survivors experience health problems after they've recovered?A: According to Dr. Bausch, ""The dogma prior to this outbreak was that survivors got better after a time. That even though they had been through hell, once they got better that was the end of it -- they were okay. But now we're recognizing that there are a lot of problems that can persist for a long time.""Q: Could this kind of resurgence of the virus in a survivor spark a new outbreak?A: As far as researchers can tell, when Ebola virus flares up again in a survivor, the person doesn't develop full-blown EVD. Instead, the virus causes problems in a particular part of their body. The most common seems to be eye infection. And in those cases, the Ebola virus is basically trapped inside the eye, so it can't be transmitted to other people.Q: What happens when a pregnant woman contracts Ebola?A: According to Dr. Bausch, as far as researchers can tell, even if a pregnant woman who is infected with EVD survives, the fetus will not. Often the woman will miscarry while she is still sick, but she may not actually lose the fetus until after she recovers. In those cases, the baby is stillborn, and the woman no longer has Ebola virus in her blood, but the stillborn child that she delivers will still have the virus in its blood. This presents a risk to health care workers who assist with the delivery. In a few cases, workers are suspected to have been infected under these circumstances.Q: Did any of those experimental treatments that people were clamoring for during the outbreak - the ZMapp drug, the infusions of blood plasma from survivors -- actually work?A: According to Dr. Bausch, unfortunately no. The drug companies mobilized quickly but ""By the time we were ready to do the trials, the bottom of the outbreak had dropped out and the cases started to fall away. Suddenly there were no patients. We haven't come out of this being able to say, 'This one is great. Now we have a treatment for Ebola.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>*******[2] Sierra Leone: new caseDate: Fri 15 Jan 2016: Source: Reuters [edited]<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-ebola-leone-testing-idUSKCN0UT1SS>Sierra Leone Ebola sample was in tests as WHO declared epidemic over----------------------------------------------------------------------------------[At] around the same time the World Health Organization (WHO) was announcing on Thursday (14 Jan 2016) the West African Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak was officially over, a British laboratory in Sierra Leone, which was testing a swab from a woman, named ""MJ,"" who had died 2 days earlier (13 Jan 2016), the sample was found to be positive for EVD.The irony of the timing showed the problems authorities meet when making the decision when to declare the end of a mayor health emergency. According to an aid agency report seen by Reuters, the woman had potentially exposed at least 27 other people to EVD.A British health agency, Public Health England (PHE), confirmed it had tested the sample from ""MJ"" at its laboratory in Makeni, in the north of the west African country.  Tim Brooks, head of Public Health England's rare and imported pathogens lab, told Reuters. ""Ebola tests take approximately 4 hours to complete,"" he said. The results were communicated to Sierra Leone's health ministry ""on Thursday (14 Jan 2015) afternoon, immediately after the initial positive Ebola test result was confirmed.""According to WHO spokesman Tarik Jasarevic, ""This really reflects what we have been saying... that there is a risk, and this outbreak is in a critical phase right now where we are moving from case management to management of risk. It is really important that people don't understand this 42-day announcement as the sign that we should all just pack up and go home. We should stay there and be ready to respond to these possible cases.""Reemergences of EVD can occur because the virus can persist for months in a person's body in organs which are protected from a person's immune system.<http://www.scidev.net/global/ebola/news/Who-ebola-disease-failure-politicians.html>
