BBC [edited]<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-35320895>A clinical trial of a new drug in France has left one person brain dead and another 5 people in hospital in serious condition. The oral trial was conducted by a private laboratory in the western city of Rennes. The trial has been suspended, and the firm is recalling the volunteers. It is unclear how many people are involved.Media reports that the drug is a cannabis-based painkiller have been denied by the health ministry. Health minister Ms Touraine said she would ""get to the bottom ... of this tragic accident"". The Paris prosecutor's office said an investigation had been opened.The trial was conducted by Biotrial, a French-based company with an international reputation, which has carried out thousands of trials since it was set up in 1989. According to the health ministry, the accident occurred on Thursday [14 Jan 2015]. The worst of those affected is brain dead, it said, while the other 5 are described as being in a critical neurological condition.The study was a Phase I clinical trial, in which healthy volunteers take the medication to evaluate the safety of its use, the ministry said. Trials typically have 3 phases to assess a new medicine for safety and effectiveness.Phase I tests for safety. A small number of people, sometimes healthy, and sometimes with a medical condition, are given a tiny dose of the drug under careful supervision not to test whether the drug works but in order to check for any side effects. Phase II sees the drug given to people who have a medical condition to see whether it does indeed help them. Phase III trials are only for medicines or devices that have already passed the 1st 2 stages and involve them being compared to existing treatments or a placebo. The trials often last a year or more, involving several thousand patients.Before any new medicine can be given to patients, detailed information about how it works and how safe it is must be collected. Clinical trials are the key to getting that data, and without volunteers to take part in the trials, there would be no new treatments for serious diseases such as cancer, multiple sclerosis and arthritis. Every year around the world, thousands of people take part in clinical trials, but incidents like this are very rare, the BBC's Hugh Schofield reports from Paris.New EU regulations to speed up clinical drug trials and streamline testing procedures across the 28-nation bloc are due to take effect in May 2016.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: 15 Jan 2015Source: BBC [edited]<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-35320895>One man is brain dead and another 5 people are in hospital after an experimental drug was administered to 90 people in a French clinical trial. There is no known antidote to the drug, the chief neuroscientist at the hospital in Rennes said.Of the 6 men in hospital, 3 could have permanent brain damage, Gilles Edan added. A 5th man is suffering from neurological problems, and a 6th man is being monitored but is not in a critical condition, Mr Edan said.The trial, which involved taking the drug orally and has now been suspended, was conducted by a private laboratory in Rennes (France). The experimental drug was manufactured by the Portuguese company Bial.All those who volunteered for the trial have been recalled, and the Paris prosecutor's office has opened an investigation. Health minister Marisol Touraine pledged to ""get to the bottom ... of this tragic accident. I was overwhelmed by their distress"" she told reporters. ""Their lives have been brutally turned upside down.""[While the following ""Analysis"" appears as part of a separate article, it is a continuation of the above article - Mod.TG]:Analysis:by James Gallagher, health editor, BBC News websiteThis is the bitter price of the new medicines we take for granted. Testing such experimental drugs, at the cutting edge of science, can never be completely risk-free.The safety and effectiveness of these drugs are rigorously tested in animals. The risks are low, but there must still be a leap of faith when they are tried in people for the 1st time.This trial has been taking place since July 2015 without such major events being reported. Generally in Phase I trials, the dose is increased slowly over time, which could be why the side-effects are appearing now.The hospitalised men started taking the drug regularly on 7 Jan 2016 and began showing severe side effects 3 days later. Three of the volunteers are now facing a lifetime of disability in this ""accident of exceptional gravity"". It is a high price to pay, but thousands of people do safely take part in similar trials each year.The trial was conducted by Biotrial, a French-based company with an international reputation, which has carried out thousands of trials since it was set up in 1989. In a message on its website, the company said that ""serious adverse events related to the test drug"" had occurred. The company insisted that ""international regulations and Biotrial's procedures were followed at every stage"".According to the health ministry, the adverse effects occurred on Thursday [14 Jan 2016].New EU regulations to speed up clinical drug trials and streamline testing procedures across the 28-nation bloc are due to take effect in 2018. [Report [1] above says May 2016. - Mod.SH]--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall******[3]Date: 15 Jan 2015Source: The Independent [edited]<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/france-drug-trial-three-people-may-have-irreversible-brain-damage-after-accident-a6814976.html>A botched drug trial in France may have left 3 people with ""irreversible"" brain damage, a doctor at the hospital has claimed.Professor Gilles Edan, the chief neuroscientist at the hospital where the trial took place, said 4 men have ""neurological problems"", of whom 3 could have ""irreversible"" brain damage; another of the men has been declared brain-dead. One of the men is being kept in hospital, but is in a less critical condition.Six previously healthy medical volunteers are now in hospital after taking part in the botched drug test at a private clinic in western France, the Health Ministry said. The drug trial, which was testing a new painkiller compound, involved 90 healthy volunteers who were given the experimental drug in varying doses, France's health minister Marisol Touraine told a news conference in Rennes.The 6 men in hospital, aged between 28 and 49, were healthy when the trial began on 7 Jan 2016, Ms Touraine said, adding that one man now classified as brain dead was admitted to Rennes Hospital on Sunday [10 Jan 2016].Biotrial, a research company for the reported drug manufacturers, Bial, have defended their drugs safety testing record following the incident. A spokesperson for Biotrial said it was being conducted in ""full compliance with international regulations"" and its own procedures, which include health monitoring.The drug was based on a natural brain compound similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, Professor Eden confirmed.Ms Touraine said the medication was not based on cannabis, as some media reports claimed. She urged calm, saying that no drug on the market was implicated in the failed trial. She said the drug was produced by the Portuguese pharmaceutical company Bial. All the other volunteers are being contacted, Ms Touraine said.[byline: Alexandra Sims]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[4]Date: 16 Jan 2016Source: Forbes [edited]<http://www.forbes.com/sites/judystone/2016/01/16/bials-french-clinicial-trial-ends-in-disaster-what-went-wrong/#2715e4857a0b6c5485d9b2cf>A Phase 1, or 1st-in-human clinical trial run by Biotrial, a long-standing French-based clinical research organization, [has] ended disastrously. One healthy volunteer is brain-dead and others are seriously -- and perhaps permanently -- left with serious neurologic damage, according to Dr Pierre-Gilles Edan, head of the neurology department at the hospital in Rennes where the volunteers were taken, and France health minister Marisol Touraine. Edan said that MRIs of the affected patients show deep cerebral hemorrhage and necrosis and that the ""handicap that could be irreversible"".The volunteers all apparently received a Bial Pharmaceutical novel compound, BIA 10-2474, designed to target pain relief by acting on cannabinoid receptors. Bial is also a long-established company, founded in 1924 in Portugal, but also having a large international presence.According to Thompson-Reuters' Bioworld, a potential study volunteer provided study-related documents that described the investigational drug BIA 10-2474 as a ""product in development for the treatment of different medical conditions from anxiety to Parkinson's disease, but also for the treatment of chronic pain of sclerosis, cancer, hypertension or the treatment of obesity.""All 6 volunteers received the oral drug on 7 Jan 2016; 5 became ill on 10 Jan 2016. Surprisingly, the trial has been ongoing since July 2015, and at least 90 participants completed the trial uneventfully, receiving various doses of drug. Presumably, the doses escalated over time, as typically occurs in Phase 1 trials. There were an additional 38 who received placebo, very unusual in a Phase 1 trial, where the goal is to test the safety of increasing doses.The investigational drug reportedly is thought by Bial to inhibit the FAAH enzyme and works by targeting the endo-cannibinoid system which helps a person sense harm.With any drug in development, the compound begins with animal, or pre-clinical testing for safety.Phase 1 trials examine the safety of increasing doses, and are the 1st time an experimental drug is given to people. As I explain in my book, Conducting Clinical Research, Phase 1 also looks at ""pharmacokinetics, or PK (how long the drug lasts in the body; details about its absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion), and pharmacodynamics, or PD (details of the drug's activity)."" And typically, for ""1st-in-human trials, dosing is started at less than 1/10th of the human equivalent dose at the NOAEL (no observable adverse effect level) seen in the most sensitive species in 2 different animal studies."" Phase 1 trials rely on healthy volunteers who are paid for their time, inconvenience, discomfort, and risk. In this trial, each volunteer received 1900 euros (USD 2080) for participating.If the drug survives Phase 1, Phase 2 looks at efficacy and dosing for the intended indication. More people take part in this phase, but it is still a very limited population. Next, Phase 3 broadens the population to include those with more underlying diseases and compares the study medication either to placebo or to one already on the market. After approval by the FDA, Phase 4 trials are often marketing driven. If done properly, they will continue to look for safety issues.There are so many questions, as little information has been released. We don't know what doses this group of ill volunteers received or how that was different from earlier groups. It was likely the 1st of a higher dosage. We don't know whether or how food affected the drug's metabolism.Could there have been a contaminant causing disaster in one batch of drug? While much less likely with an oral than IV drug, an error in manufacturing or the concentration of drug could perhaps have affected one batch and not others.Did these patients all receive the drug at the same time (in parallel) or sequentially? It appears that they all received it on 7 Jan 2016. In the last disastrous clinical trial, TeGenero TGN1412 in London, in 2006, 6 Phase 1 healthy volunteers almost died with multi-organ failure from a cytokine storm. This became known as the ""Elephant Man"" trial, for how bad the victims looked. One of the major lessons was that volunteers should be dosed sequentially, allowing time between each to detect a serious adverse reaction.1st, any clinical trial, especially 1st-in-human testing, comes with unpredictable risks. There is no way that animal studies can successfully predict them all. Even after clinical testing and approval of new agents, serious side effects are found all the time, as the drug is given to thousands or millions of people. Infrequent adverse events may be readily overlooked or not seen in clinical testing with small numbers of subjects.The TeGenero trial taught us -- or should have -- the importance of going slowly, in a step by step manner. Was that followed here?Serious adverse events on Phase 1 trials are very rare, on the order of ""once every 26.3 years of individual subject exposure"". But some times bad things happen even when everything was done correctly, as exemplified by the NIH FIAU trial 10, with serious adverse events. The Institute of Medicine reviewed all and commended the investigators, concluding ""their subsequent response to the crisis was exemplary"".Do subjects have any recourse? In France, these victims will receive compensation. That is not always the case. One needs to read the fine print carefully. This is one argument for a clinical trial injury fund, as a safety net for volunteers, who are critically important for drug development.What is imperative is that we conduct trials transparently and ethically, follow safety procedures rigorously, provide a clear and thorough consent process, and minimize the coercion of financial incentives. We still have a lot to learn.[byline: Judy Stone]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[5]Date: 17 Jan 2016Source: Yahoo News [edited]<http://news.yahoo.com/volunteer-dies-troubles-french-drug-trial-150712079>A man died in a French hospital on Sunday [17 Jan 2016] after taking part in an experimental drug trial for a painkiller, and 5 other participants remain hospitalized after one of France's most troubling medical incidents.French prosecutors have launched a manslaughter investigation into the unusual case, which shines a spotlight on the practice of testing drugs on paid, healthy human volunteers. Scores of others were also given the drug. The Portuguese pharmaceutical company testing the drug, Bial, said in a statement that it's working with health authorities to determine what caused ""this tragic and unfortunate situation"".The Rennes University Hospital in western France announced the death in a statement, but didn't identify the patient, who had already been [sic] in a state of brain death. He was among 6 male volunteers between 28 and 49 hospitalized last week after volunteering to take the drug. French health authorities have said 3 of the hospitalized volunteers face possible brain damage.The Paris prosecutor's office said the investigation was expanded after the death to include potential manslaughter charges. The trial, which began on 7 Jan 2016, involved 90 healthy volunteers who were given the experimental drug in varying doses at different times.The hospital said it has contacted the 84 other volunteers exposed to the new painkiller. Ten of those volunteers underwent medical exams Saturday [16 Jan 2016], but the hospital found no anomalies, the statement says. It said another 5 will have medical exams closer to their homes but didn't say whether the others are being monitored or tested.The drug was given orally to healthy volunteers as part of a Phase 1 trial by Biotrial, a drug evaluation company based in Rennes, on behalf of Bial.Health minister Marisol Touraine said that in addition to treating pain, the drug was intended to ease mood and anxiety troubles as well as motor problems linked to neurodegenerative illnesses by acting on the endocannabinoid system. In this system, natural brain compounds act on specific receptors to exert their effects. Touraine said the drug was not based on marijuana or cannabis, as some reported.Bial said clinical trials started last June 2015 following toxicology tests and that 108 healthy people had already taken part in trials with no moderate or serious reactions.It's rare for volunteers to fall seriously ill during Phase 1 trials, which study safe usage, side effects and other measures on healthy volunteers, rather than drug effectiveness.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[While there is a need to understand a drug's effect on humans, this causes one to wonder whether enough research was done on this substance in animals. None of these articles tells us whether these animals were non-human primates. While animal activists may be alarmed at the use of animals, especially non-human primates, vast amounts of information may be gleaned that may save lives before a drug is put into human clinical trials.Consent forms for all human clinical trials need to be specific to allow volunteers, regardless of compensation, to adequately access the risk to their lives. Volunteers may not understand or be confused by the consent form, which may be vague and couched in legal language. Volunteers are likely to believe they are helping advance science and that the drug in question has proven safe or would not have made it this far. Researchers may feel under pressure to recruit volunteers.No volunteer expects to die or become permanently disabled or brain dead from taking an experimental drug. Trials are expensive, and this type of adverse event can have a tremendous consequence on all drug manufacturers. We await further information. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/100>.].................................................sb/tg/msp/sh"
