Brazilian Society for Tropical Medicine [edited]<http://sbmt.org.br/portal/morte-por-febre-amarela-urbana-pode-ligar-sinal-de-alerta-na-rede-de-saude-do-pais/?locale=en-US&lang=en>The last case of urban yellow fever [YF] transmission in Brazil took place in 1942, in Acre State. For this reason, the death in Natal (RN) called for special attention from the sanitary authorities. If the victim acquired the infection naturally, the Brazilian health network could trigger an alert. This is the opinion of Dr Pedro Vasconcelos, virologist and former director of the Evandro Chagas Insitute (IEC), in Para State.IEC elaborated on the report, confirming the recent death by urban yellow fever. Interviewed by the Brazilian Society of Tropical Medicine, Dr Vasconcelos explained how the case has been conducted. He believes the investigations will point toward whether the disease combat protocols should be changed, although, initially, this is an unusual case.Find the full interview below:BSMT: How was the case's investigation?Dr Pedro Vasconcelos: First of all it is important to clarify that IEC received the material as a suspected case of hemorrhagic dengue fever. After tests for dengue turned negative, it is our routine to test for other diseases with similar clinical signs (differential diagnosis in syndromic surveillance) trying to clarify the etiological diagnosis. This way, other tests for hemorrhagic fevers including yellow fever, returned a positive result in immunohistochemistry (IHQ). The result was surprising; I would even say unexpected. New IHQ tests were conducted using specific serum for yellow fever's both polyclonal and monoclonal forms, and the results confirmed yellow fever. In the face of this finding, all investigations on the patient's prior trips and vaccines were conducted by the Health Ministry's health surveillance secretary and apparently was unsuccessful in explaining a possible trip to an endemic area or not being vaccinated against the disease. An eco-epidemiological investigation was also initiated aiming to capture possible potential FY virus mosquito vectors. These studies are under development.BSMT: Does this result mean an alert for the Brazilian health network?Dr Pedro Vasconcelos: If the case is confirmed as a naturally acquired infection, then yes. This would mean the reintroduction of yellow fever in an area where the last reported cases took place 80 years ago. We must exclude the possibility of the acute viscerotropic disease by the 17DD vaccine, for which initial cases in Brazil took place in 1999 and were published in The Lancet in 2001, one of the world's most renowned scientific journals, and I had the honor and privilege to conduct the article's publication. Obviously, if this is a naturally acquired yellow fever case, we must extend urban (_Aedes aegypti_) and wild _(Haemagogus_ and _Sabethes_) vector surveillance in the primary hosts as well as seeking epizootic diseases in non-human primates, and, depending on the results, part of the population may have to undergo vaccination.BSMT: Are there suspicions of other deaths by the disease?Dr Pedro Vasconcelos: As far as I know, there are not. Apparently, this was an isolated case, which is very unusual.BSMT: Are the disease combat protocols going to be changed, or can the case be dealt with as unusual?Dr Pedro Vasconcelos: Everything depends on the investigations by the Health Surveillance Secretariat (SVS), Rio Grande do Norte Health Secretariat and IEC. At 1st, this could be considered an unusual case, but we must wait for the investigation's results. We know caution can't harm anyone.BSMT: How is the death by yellow fever being treated by the scientific community?Dr Pedro Vasconcelos: With caution, but calmly, since the surveillance is active and sensible, besides being ready for early diagnosis of other cases that eventually happen. I remember in 2008, in Paraguay, an urban yellow fever outbreak took place in Asuncion's suburbs, and the vector control actions combined with the vaccination of the exposed population eliminated the transmission, which became restricted to a 9-case cluster. This way, the actions are known and can be immediately put into practice if there are new cases in humans, or in the event of an epizootic (monkey death by the yellow fever virus), or even in the event of the detection of the virus in potential mosquito vectors. The Health Ministry along with the state health secretary are paying close attention and are ready to intervene if necessary.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This appears to be a follow up of a YF case in Natal reported on 29 Dec 2015. The state Secretariat of Public Health of Rio Grande do Norte (SESAP) reported on 29 Dec 2015 that they were investigating the death of a woman in July [2015] in Natal who was positive for YF. This case has attracted attention because the state is not classified as a YF risk area by the Ministry of Health, and there have been no occurrences in the region. The victim had not traveled to YF-endemic areas.Mod.RNA noted that there was a possibility that a complication of a serious post-YF vaccination adverse effect occurred and must be investigated (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20151230.3902261). If this was a naturally acquired case of urban (_Aedes aegypti_) YF virus transmission, it is potentially a serious public health threat that requires immediate response with a vaccination campaign and intensified surveillance for additional human cases and presence of YF virus in mosquitoes with subsequent vector control efforts. Since no additional cases have been reported after the July 2015 fatality, it appears that no ongoing YF virus transmission occurred there.YF virus is endemic in Brazil in its sylvan cycle, with the risk of human infections in the forest and subsequent spill over into urban and suburban human populations. Since the fatality occurred over 5 months ago, one assumes that the investigations done by the Health Surveillance Secretariat (SVS), Rio Grande do Norte Health Secretariat, and IEC have now been completed. ProMED-mail would be interested in knowing what the findings of those investigations are.Maps of Brazil can be accessed at <http://s13.postimg.org/jumnalk87/map_of_Brazil.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>. - Mod.TY]
