The Times of India, Times News Network (TNN) [edited]<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/pune/Surge-in-drug-resistant-TB-cases-across-state/articleshow/50635131.cms>Maharashtra recorded 779 cases of extensively drug resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB), the world's most untreatable form of TB, in 2015 -- the highest figure recorded in last 5 years. Mumbai [the capital city of the Indian state of Maharashtra] registered the most number of cases at 475, higher than the total number of cases (469) reported in the state in 2014. The latest report of the state health department has revealed this information.XDR-TB is a rare form of tuberculosis that is resistant to at least 4 of the core anti-TB drugs. It takes a substantially longer time to treat this form of the disease than the drug-susceptible form and requires the use of 2nd-line anti-TB drugs, which are expensive.Health experts say the rise in the detection rate of XDR-TB cases is not surprising, given the widespread prevalence of TB and the rising cases of multidrug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) in the country. That patients often do not complete the recommended treatment is also a factor adding to the numbers.""The detection of XDR-TB has increased considerably after more centres equipped with the facility to test resistance to second-line tuberculosis came up in state. That is one of the reasons for the considerable rise,"" said state tuberculosis officer Sanjeev Kamble, who is also the joint director of the state health department.The department started diagnosing XDR-TB after the 1st case was reported in 2011 at Hinduja Hospital in Mumbai. ""Earlier, we had to send samples for testing resistance to 2nd-line TB drug to the National Tuberculosis Institute in Bengaluru. Now, we have 5 testing centres where sensitivity to 2nd-line drug is tested,"" Sharad Patil assistant director (TB), said. Patil added that many patients turn multi-drug resistant after seeking faulty treatment from private practitioners, over which the department has little control.Among other places in the state, 12 cases of XDR-TB were reported in Kolhapur, 7 in Sindhudurg, while the Malegaon Municipal Corporation registered 6 cases. Besides, Gondiya and rural Nagpur recorded 6 cases each.""Pune city [the 2nd largest in the state of Maharashtra after the state capital city of Mumbai] recorded 5 cases of XDR-TB last year [2015]. 4 cases were reported in rural parts of Pune, while Pimpri Chinchwad registered 3 cases. In 2014, Pimpri Chicnhwad had registered 9 cases of XDR-TB, while Pune had reported a single case. Rural Pune had registered six cases in 2014,"" the health department report states.[byline: Umesh Isalkar]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Multidrug resistant tuberculosis (MDR TB) is a form of tuberculosis (TB) that is resistant to at least isoniazid plus rifampin, the 2 most potent 1st-line drugs used for the treatment of tuberculosis. Extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR TB) is a form of TB resistant to isoniazid and rifampin, as well as resistant to any fluoroquinolone and at least one of the 3 2nd-line injectable anti-TB drugs (amikacin, kanamycin, or capreomycin).Drug resistant TB requires more extensive chemotherapy, involves drug therapy over more extended periods of time, is more often unsuccessful, is more expensive, and is more often fatal than drug-susceptible TB. XDR TB is more likely to be fatal in people with HIV infection or other conditions that can weaken the immune system.Drug resistant TB is commoner in people who develop TB disease again after having been treated for TB disease in the past, or are receiving ineffective drug regimens. As reported by the news report above, the recent presence in the Indian state of Maharashtra of more laboratories capable of detecting resistance to second-line TB drugs likely accounts in large part for the increasing numbers of XDR TB. More cases of XDR TB will likely be detected with expansion of these diagnostic laboratory facilities in the future.However, with large numbers of people with active XDR pulmonary TB, who remain either untreated or ineffectively treated and who are in contact with susceptible people, as is apparently occurring in India, the risk of person-to-person transmission of these strains likely is considerable. To control the current XDR tuberculosis epidemic in India will require greater ability to rapidly determine drug susceptibility and rapidly institute effective treatment regimens. - Mod.MLMaps of India can be seen at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/310>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
