Emerging Infectious Diseases journal [edited]<http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2203.150593>[ref: Kayali G, El-Shesheny R, Kandeil A, et al. Avian influenza A(H5N1) virus in Egypt. Emerg Infect Dis. 2016 Mar [date cited]. DOI: 10.3201/eid2203.150593]---------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------""In Egypt, avian influenza A subtype H5N1 and H9N2 viruses are enzootic in poultry. The control plan devised by veterinary authorities in Egypt to prevent infections in poultry focused mainly on vaccination and ultimately failed. Recently, widespread H5N1 infections in poultry and a substantial increase in the number of human cases of H5N1 infection were observed. We summarize surveillance data from 2009 through 2014 and show that avian influenza viruses are established in poultry in Egypt and are continuously evolving genetically and antigenically. We also discuss the epidemiology of human infection with avian influenza in Egypt and describe how the true burden of disease is underestimated. We discuss the failures of relying on vaccinating poultry as the sole intervention tool. We conclude by highlighting the key components that need to be included in a new strategy to control avian influenza infections in poultry and humans in Egypt.""Human cases [H5N1]------------------The paper states that ""During 2006-2015, the estimated number of confirmed human cases of H5N1 infection in Egypt was 292, with a 34 per cent case fatality rate. The number of reported cases by year for 2006-2015 shows that, before the 2014-15 winter season, the annual number of cases never exceeded 40. However, in just 2 months, January and February 2015, a total of 88 cases were reported. The most recent cases occurred in persons who reported exposure to backyard poultry (70 per cent), bred domestic birds (26 per cent), slaughtered poultry (14 per cent), or were exposed to dead birds (4 per cent)...""Extent of avian influenza infection in Egypt--------------------------------------------""In Egypt, the number of reported human cases of avian influenza infection appears to be underestimated. An underestimation might result in an overestimation of the case-fatality rate, but it would certainly underestimate the extent of human infection with avian influenza viruses. Results from a controlled, serologic cohort study of persons in Egypt exposed and not exposed to poultry estimated the seroprevalence of antibodies against H5N1 (titers greater than 80) at 2 per cent. If this seroprevalence were to be extrapolated to the entire poultry-exposed population in Egypt, the true number of infections would amount to several hundred thousand. These figures are even more striking when it comes to human infection with H9N2 viruses. The seroprevalence of H9N2 antibodies detected in the same cohort study ranged from 5.6 per cent to 7.5 per cent, whereas just 1 case of H9N2 infection was reported...""Proposed avian influenza control plan-------------------------------------""The avian influenza situation in Egypt is deteriorating, evident in the fact that H5N1 and H9N2 viruses are enzootic in poultry and that incidence of H5N1 and H9N2 infection is increasing. The problem is also evident in the sharp increase in human H5N1 cases and the detection of the 1st human H9N2 case. Thus, it is imperative that authorities in Egypt devise and implement an aggressive control plan to curb the spread of disease in human and animal populations. The control plan must include the following elements: 1) mapping of the unlicensed, small-scale poultry farms that have become abundant in rural areas; 2) increasing the biosecurity levels of these small farms by using inexpensive tools; 3) revamping veterinary and public health surveillance and conducting joint human-animal interface surveillance and risk-assessment exercises; 4) encouraging poultry owners to report outbreaks and providing them appropriate compensation; 5) intervening, when poultry outbreaks are reported, by culling infected poultry and setting monitoring zones around each focus point; 6) properly decontaminating infected farms; 7) encouraging the use of disinfectants in backyards where poultry are raised; 8) increasing awareness about the effects of avian influenza; 9) testing patients with suspected influenza for H5N1 and H9N2 virus; and 10) reevaluating the vaccination strategy, including that for H9N2 virus. If vaccination is to remain an important tool in the control plan, then the following aspects should be considered: 1) matching vaccine strains to currently circulating strains; 2) matching challenge strains to currently circulating strains; 3) maintaining high vaccination coverage; 4) ensuring vaccine efficacy not only in a laboratory setting but also in the field; and 5) evaluating vaccine efficacy on an annual basis.""Conclusions-----------""Egypt is one of the few countries where H5N1 virus has become enzootic and is the only country with a high number of H5N1 outbreaks among poultry and cases among human. During the 2014-15 winter season, a sudden and substantial increase in human infection with H5N1 viruses was observed. There is no obvious or confirmed reason for this increase, but data indicate the following: 1) H9N2 virus is co-circulating and co-infecting with H5N1 viruses, 2) H5N1 viruses causing the infections possess some mutations that were rarely seen in the past, and 3) the poultry vaccination program is failing. However, our perspective was limited to the data available through our surveillance program, which might not be representative of the epizootiology of avian influenza virus in Egypt. Regardless of the causes of the recent increase in human H5N1 cases, this situation evolved because of the ineffective control strategy that was implemented. Controlling the situation requires a One Health approach, but certainly the greater share of responsibility now lies with the veterinary side.""--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall[The full publication, including figures, can be viewed at the URL above. This well written and important overview of avian influenza A(H5N1 and H7N9) in Egypt raises serious concern over the increasing prevalence of infection in poultry and humans, especially considering the probable underreporting discussed in the paper. The authors recommend the steps they feel need to be taken to address this increasing public health threat, and the problems with the vaccination program. Recommended reading! - Mod.LKThe following data, extracted (slightly edited) from the paper's chapter ""Avian influenza in poultry in Egypt"", may be of interest:In Egypt, a systematic surveillance program for avian influenza viruses has been in place since 2009. Commercial and semicommercial farms, abattoirs, backyard flocks, and live bird markets located in different governorates are sampled on a monthly basis regardless of the presence of disease symptoms in poultry. In each governorate, the same locations are continuously sampled by a poultry veterinarian, who collects one swab sample per bird; depending on the size of the poultry population, as many as 5 birds are sampled per flock. Birds are not randomly selected, and samples also are collected from sick or dead birds found onsite. Samples are mostly from chickens, but ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, and quails also are sampled. This program enabled detection of genetic and antigenic changes in H5N1 viruses in Egypt. It provided important epizootiologic data and described the poultry sectors acting as reservoirs of H5N1 viruses. The rate of avian influenza infection during August 2009-July 2010 was 5 per cent, exclusively attributable to H5N1 infection, and was more concentrated in the commercial production sector. From August 2010 through January 2013, the positivity rate increased to 10 per cent, and the infection was detected in all poultry production sectors. In 2011, H9N2 viruses emerged and were detected by this program and other surveillance activities in Egypt. The monthly positivity rate of avian influenza infection from August 2009 through December 2014 is shown graphically (<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/22/3/15-0593-f1>) with sharp increases during the colder months (November through March). Emergence of H9N2 virus in poultry and an increase in human H5N1 cases are indicated. After the detection of H9N2 virus in 2011 the positivity rate during colder months was higher than that in the period when H5N1 was the only virus infecting poultry, exceeding 20 per cent in some months. Furthermore, co-infection with H5N1 and H9N2 viruses was frequently detected. The same seasonal pattern was seen with both strains during the period February 2013-December 2014 (<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/22/3/15-0593-f2>).Among the authors' conclusions: 1) H9N2 virus is co-circulating and co-infecting with H5N1 viruses, 2) H5N1 viruses causing the infections possess some mutations that were rarely seen in the past, 3) the poultry vaccination program is failing. ""However, our perspective was limited to the data available through our surveillance program, which might not be representative of the epizootiology of avian influenza virus in Egypt. Regardless of the causes of the recent increase in human H5N1 cases, this situation evolved because of the ineffective control strategy that was implemented. Controlling the situation requires a One Health approach, but certainly the greater share of responsibility now lies with the veterinary side."" - Mod.ASA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/55>.]
