Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/listeria/outbreaks/bagged-salads-01-16/index.html>Since September 2015, CDC has been collaborating with public health officials in several states and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to investigate a multistate outbreak of _Listeria monocytogenes_ infections (listeriosis). Listeria can cause a serious, life-threatening illness.Public health investigators are using the PulseNet system to identify illnesses that may be part of this outbreak. PulseNet is the national subtyping network of public health and food regulatory agency laboratories coordinated by CDC. DNA ""fingerprinting"" is performed on listeria bacteria isolated from ill people by using techniques called pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and whole genome sequencing (WGS). PulseNet manages a national database of these DNA fingerprints to identify possible outbreaks. WGS gives a more detailed DNA fingerprint than PFGE.12 people infected with the outbreak strain of listeria have been reported from 6 states since 5 Jul 2015. The number of ill people reported from each state is as follows: Indiana (1), Massachusetts (1), Michigan (4), New Jersey (1), New York (4), and Pennsylvania (1). WGS has been performed on clinical isolates from all 12 ill people and has shown that the isolates are highly related genetically.Listeria specimens were collected from 5 Jul 2015 to 23 Dec 2015. Ill people range in age from 3 years to 83, and the median age is 66. 6Sixty-nine per cent of ill people are female. All 12 ill people reported being hospitalized, and 1 person from Michigan died as a result of listeriosis. 1 of the illnesses reported was in a pregnant woman.Epidemiologic and laboratory evidence available at this time indicates that packaged salads produced at the Dole processing facility in Springfield, Ohio and sold under various brand names are the likely source of this outbreak.State and local health departments are interviewing ill people about the foods they may have eaten or other exposures in the month before their illness began. All 5 ill people who were asked about packaged salad reported eating a packaged salad. Two ill people specified the brand of packaged salad eaten: both reported various varieties of Dole brand packaged salad.As part of a routine product sampling program, the Ohio Department of Agriculture collected a Dole brand Field Greens packaged salad from a retail location and isolated listeria. This packaged salad was produced at the Springfield, Ohio Dole processing facility. In January 2016, WGS showed that the listeria isolate from the packaged salad was highly related genetically to isolates from ill people. This information linked the illnesses to Dole brand packaged salads produced at the Dole processing facility in Springfield, Ohio.On 21 Jan 2016, Dole reported to CDC that it had stopped production at the processing facility in Springfield, Ohio. The company also reported that it is withdrawing packaged salads currently on the market that were produced at this facility. The withdrawal does not affect other Dole products.CDC recommends that consumers do not eat, restaurants do not serve, and retailers do not sell packaged salads produced at the Dole processing facility in Springfield, Ohio. These packaged salads were sold under various brand names, including Dole, Fresh Selections, Simple Truth, Marketside, The Little Salad Bar, and President's Choice. The packaged salads can be identified by the letter ""A"" at the beginning of the manufacturing code found on the package. At this time, there is no evidence to suggest that packaged salads produced at other Dole processing facilities in the United States are linked to illness.CDC and state and local public health partners are continuing laboratory surveillance through PulseNet to identify additional ill people and to interview them. Updates will be provided when more information is available.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall******[2]Date: Fri 22 Jan 2016Source: CTV News, Associated Press report [edited]<http://www.ctvnews.ca/health/1-dead-in-listeria-outbreak-linked-to-dole-lettuce-recall-affects-canada-1.2748461>Dole is withdrawing packaged salads from Ontario, Quebec and Atlantic Canada and more than 20 US states due to a listeria outbreak. CDC reported on Friday [22 Jan 2016] that packaged salads produced at a Dole facility in Ohio are linked to one death in Michigan and the hospitalizations of 12 people in 6 states.The outbreak, which dates back to July [2015], is linked to salads sold under the brand names Dole, Fresh Selections, Simple Truth, Marketside, The Little Salad Bar and PC Organics.A ""small number"" of PC Organics products packaged by Dole and sold in plastic tubs appear to be affected and include spinach and arugula, said Kevin Groh, vice-president of corporate affairs and communication for Loblaw Companies Limited. Supermarkets were awaiting official notification late on Friday [22 Jan 2016] from the Canadian Food Inspection Agency on removing any affected products from stores, said Dave Wilkes, senior vice-president of the Retail Council of Canada. ""As soon as supermarkets are aware of the products that are affected they'll take those products off the shelves,"" he said. ""They won't wait. Food safety is the No. 1 priority. It is a non-negotiable part of the business so as soon as they're aware of the products that have been identified they will come off the shelf immediately.""CDC said it connected the outbreak to the Dole salads this month after Ohio agriculture officials found listeria in a bag bought at a retail location. The strain of listeria was ""highly related genetically"" to the listeria that had made people sick. CDC said Dole had stopped all production at its Springfield, Ohio, plant and is withdrawing packaged salads on the market that were produced there. Consumers can identify the salads by the letter ""A"" at the beginning of the manufacturing code on the packages.On Wednesday [20 Jan 2016], the Public Health Agency of Canada reported that 7 people had been hospitalized in a listeria outbreak affecting 5 provinces. A spokeswoman said in an email late on Friday [22 Jan 2016] that the agency believes there is a link with the US outbreak, but is awaiting final lab results.The agency said there were 3 cases in Ontario and 1 each in Quebec, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland and Labrador. Most of them were women with an average age of 81. They became sick between September 2015 and early January [2016] and 1 of them died. It has not been determined if listeria contributed to the death. The agency said packaged leafy greens, salad blends and salad kits were being investigated as a possible source of the outbreak.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED-mail recently reported on the multi-province Canadian listeriosis outbreak suspected to be due to listeria-contaminated pre-packaged leafy vegetables or mixed salads, in which 7 people fell ill between September 2015 and the beginning of January 2016 (ProMED-mail post Listeriosis - Canada: fatal, pre-packed vegetables susp, RFI 20160122.3956200). This time period overlaps that of the US listeriosis outbreak reported by CDC above, due to packaged salads produced at the Dole processing facility in Springfield, Ohio. Although CDC did not specify when the US patients 1st became ill, listeria specimens from them were collected from 5 Jul to 23 Dec 2015.We would appreciate further information from knowledgeable sources when it becomes available linking these 2 outbreaks.For discussions of listeriosis, please see my comments in prior ProMED-mail posts listed below. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>, <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12>.]
