Eurosurveillance [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=21361>Citation: Williams C, Thomas R, Pickersgill T, et al. Cluster of atypical adult Guillain-Barre syndrome temporally associated with neurological illness due to EV-D68 in children, South Wales, United Kingdom, October 2015 to January 2016. Eurosurveillance 2016;21(4):pii=30119. DOI: <http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.4.30119>Surveillance and outbreak report Cluster of Atypical Adult Guillain-Barre Syndrome Temporally Associated with Neurological Illness Due to EV-D68 in Children, South Wales, United Kingdom, October 2015 to January 2016--------------------------------------------------------------------------------We report a cluster of atypical Guillain-Barre syndrome in 10 adults temporally related to a cluster of 4 children with acute flaccid paralysis, over a 3-month period in South Wales, United Kingdom. All adult cases were male, aged between 24 and 77 years. 7 had prominent facial diplegia at onset. Available electrophysiological studies showed axonal involvement in 5 adults. 7 reported various forms of respiratory disease before onset of neurological symptoms. The ages of children ranged from 1 to 13 years, 3 of the 4 were 2 years old or younger. Enterovirus testing is available for 3 children; 2 had evidence of enterovirus D68 infection in stool or respiratory samples. We describe the clinical features, epidemiology and state of current investigations for these unusual clusters of illness.The event---------In January 2016, an initial cluster of 5 cases of Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) in adult males was reported to Public Health Wales by neurologists at the University Hospital Wales in Cardiff. Unusually for GBS there was: prominent bilateral facial weakness (facial diplegia), evidence for axonal damage on nerve conduction studies rather than the more typical demyelinating pattern; atypical clinical onset of symptoms and atypical clinical progression. During the initial investigations, 2 cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in children from the same areas were identified.Background----------GBS is an acute inflammatory peripheral nerve disorder of which the commonest type is a demyelinating, ascending paralysis, accounting for around 90 per cent of cases. There are rarer but recognised variants, including Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS), around 5 per cent of GBS, which is typified by the triad of ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and areflexia; and acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN), 5 per cent of GBS) in which an axonal rather than demyelinating pattern of nerve damage is seen and tendon reflexes can be paradoxically brisk [1].GBS is considered to be an autoimmune disorder triggered by many recognised precipitants via molecular mimicry. There are multiple reports of AMAN clusters, most notably in Asia such as the northeast China outbreaks where an infectious agent has been suspected [2]. AMAN clusters in North America and Europe are much less common and the clinical pattern described by many probable cases here defy contemporary diagnostic categorisation [1].There are several known infectious triggers for GBS. _Campylobacter_ spp. is the most commonly reported prodromal infection, and has been associated with clusters of the axonal variants of GBS in China [3]. Influenza is also a known trigger [4]. More rarely other infectious caused by pathogens such as hepatitis A [5], _Mycoplasma pneumoniae_ [6], _Acinetobacter baumannii_ [7], cytomegalovirus [8] and Epstein-Barr virus [9] have been associated with GBS and AMAN syndrome. Recently, hepatitis E virus has been suggested as a possible common trigger for GBS [10], and the emerging Zika and West Nile viruses have also been linked to GBS [11,12].AFP is a clinical presentation, rather than diagnosis, with rapid onset of weakness of one or more limbs, sometimes associated with weakness of muscles involved in swallowing and respiration, and progression over days and weeks. GBS is one of the differential diagnoses for AFP [13]. Acute poliomyelitis is another, with AFP surveillance an important part of the surveillance for polio. More recently, enterovirus D-68 (EV-D68) has been found to cause an illness presenting with AFP, with radiological evidence of an acute myelitis [14]. ... - moreDiscussion----------The adult and child cases presented are clustered in both space and time, with adult cases showing predominantly the more unusual variant forms of GBS. The majority of adult cases showed AMAN and AMSAN, i.e. features of the axonal variants of GBS. These variants are rare in Europe and the United States, where they account for only 5 per cent of GBS cases. However, they are more common in China, Japan and Central and South America where they constitute 30-47 per cent of cases [19]. None of our cases meet the diagnostic criteria for MFS [1], which has a much lower incidence than GBS (0.1/100 000 compared with 1.2-1.9/100 000 [19]).This cluster of 10 adult cases over a 3-month period would constitute a winter peak within the context of population estimates and hospital episode data for the past decade. What is unusual, compared with expected winter peaks of incidence, are the clinical features of facial weakness and asymmetric onset, and electrophysiological features of axonal involvement. The strong male predominance (all adults were male) is also unusual, with the usual male:female ratio estimated at 1.5:1 [19].Both adult and child cases cluster geographically outside major cities, with 12 of 14 living outside the 3 main cities in the area (Cardiff, Newport and Swansea), despite 48 per cent of the population of the counties with cases being in these cities [16].The child cases in our cluster are clinically different from the cases in the adult cluster, presenting with a syndrome similar to that previously reported for EV-D68 associated AFP, with half having radiological evidence of a transverse myelitis. Adult AFP cases have been reported coincident with a rise in EV-D68 cases [14], but in this series child cases predominated, with only 9 of 59 cases aged over 21 years. 12 children in Colorado had a neurological illness at a median of 7 days following a febrile infection, with EV-D68 detected in 5 of 11 tested [20]. Their symptoms were flaccid limb weakness in 10 cases, bulbar weakness in 6 and 2 had facial weakness, accompanied by spinal MRI changes.There is no clear hypothesis as yet for the cause of the adult cluster. The temporal association of the 2 clusters could represent a coincidence, or an artifact due to changes in local diagnosis. Current hypotheses under investigation include enterovirus infection, either EV-D68 or other types; gastrointestinal infections such as _Campylobacter_ spp., hepatitis E infection and influenza. Variant forms of GBS have been associated with _C. jejuni_ [3], but here there is no stool culture evidence of campylobacteriosis. Emerging arbovirus infections such as Zika and West Nile virus are unlikely as causes for the neurological symptoms due to the absence of suitable vectors in Wales and any appropriate travel history. The clinical picture of cases was not consistent with botulism.Descriptive epidemiology, with predominance of adult males and some geographic clustering, might suggest an environmental or behavioural exposure. However, no common exposure supporting this theory has been identified and no evidence of toxic causes has been found from clinical samples so far.All but 4 of the cases had a preceding respiratory tract infection. Influenza was 1st reported as circulating in Wales from week 1 in 2016 [21], post-dating the illness for these cases. Respiratory samples are not routinely tested for enterovirus, but retrospective PCR testing of respiratory samples from children (under 16 years of age) taken from 1 Dec [2015] to 6 Jan [2016], found 17 of 163 with evidence of enterovirus and 5 of 17 with EV-D68.The methods used in defining the clusters have limitations, mainly in keeping with an evolving early report. Not all cases have undergone the same level of neuroimaging, electrophysiological and microbiological testing, so the cases are defined mainly by their clinical presentation. Exposures have not yet been systematically obtained using a standardised, closed-question questionnaire. A further review, including more intensive case finding, is being undertaken to better characterise the cluster.The child cases result either from increased recognition and diagnosis or increased true incidence of neurological disease caused by infection with EV-D68. Neurological illness due to EV-D68 has not previously been described in Wales. The adult and child clusters may be completely separate, but are presented together here because of their temporal association, and because EV-D68 neurological illness is a relatively rare diagnosis in the UK, although EV-D68 is thought likely to be circulating in the community [22].Further investigations planned include serology for hepatitis E, influenza and other possible infection triggers, using stored serum and new samples to be taken after the intravenous immunoglobulins have left the patients' serum. Further antiganglioside antibody testing, and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing are also planned. Surveillance for atypical GBS continues in Wales using a standardised reporting form and following case finding alerts to clinicians, and enhanced surveillance for enterovirus infection is also planned. Public Health Wales has alerted clinicians, and has been working with Public Health England and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) to inform other European Union countries about this cluster via the Early Warning and Response System (EWRS).[Correspondence: Christopher J Williams <Christopher.Williams25@wales.nhs.uk>]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail and HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Further details and references can be found by reading the full paper at the source URL above. Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is one of more than 100 non-polio enteroviruses. The virus was 1st identified in California in 1962. There has only been one case of Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) documented prior to this cluster associating enterovirus and GBS, thus there may be an important issue here. The 1st case associating EV-D68 and GBS was located in Ireland, which is close to Wales, so geographically there may be a link. Epstein-Barr, hepatitis E, cytomegaloviruses, West Nile, chikungunya, Zika, and other viruses have been associated with GBS. ProMED looks forward to further information on this unusual cluster of cases of GBS and whether additional etiologic agents are involved. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/281>.]
