NY Times [edited]<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/01/21/us/flint-lead-water-timeline.html?_r=0>Events That Led to Flint's Water Crisis-----Months after warning signs emerged about problems with the water in Flint, Mich., city, state and federal officials are responding to the public health emergency. High levels of lead had leached from pipes into the water supply. [The rest of this article provides a timeline of the situation. Many lead problems present as acute problems but have actually existed for some time before recognition of the situation occurs - Mod.TG]25 Apr 2014 --The city switches its water supply from Detroit's system to the Flint River. The switch was made as a cost-saving measure for the struggling city. Soon after, residents begin to complain about the water's color, taste and odor, and to report rashes and concerns about bacteria.""Flint water is safe to drink."" - News release from Flint city governmentAugust and September 2014 -- City officials issue boil-water advisories after coliform bacteria are detected in tap water. [Boiling water will kill coliform bacteria but will only serve to concentrate the lead. - Mod.TG]October 2014 -- The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality blames cold weather, aging pipes and a population decline.""The city has taken operational steps to limit the potential for a boil-water advisory to re-occur."" - according to a district supervisor for the state's Department of Environmental QualityOctober 2014 -- A General Motors plant in Flint stops using municipal water, saying it corrodes car parts.January 2015 -- Detroit's water system offers to reconnect to Flint, waiving a USD 4 million connection fee. Three weeks later, Flint's state-appointed emergency manager, declines the offer.February 2015 -- In a memo for the governor, officials play down problems and say that the water is not an imminent ""threat to public health.""""It's clear the nature of the threat was communicated poorly. It's also clear that folks in Flint are concerned about other aspects of their water -- taste, smell and color being among the top complaints.""-- according to a Memo for the governor.18 Feb 2015 --104 parts per billion of lead are detected in drinking water at [a woman's home]. [This woman] notifies the Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]. Even small amounts of lead can cause lasting health and developmental problems in children. The EPA does not require action until levels reach 15 parts per billion, but public health scientists say there is no safe level for lead in water.26 Feb 2015 --A water expert from the EPA and the Department of Environmental Quality discuss high levels of lead found in a resident's water sample.27 Feb 2015 -- An EPA expert, says that the state was testing the water in a way that could profoundly understate the lead levels. ""Given the very high lead levels found at 1 home and the preflushing happening in Flint, I'm worried that the whole town may have much higher lead levels than the compliance results indicated.""-- according to a Memo from [the EPA expert] to a state aide.3 Mar 2015 --2nd testing detects 397 parts per billion of lead in drinking water at [the woman's] home [where 1st detected.2 Mar 2015 -- Veolia, a consultant group hired by Flint, reports that the city's water meets state and federal standards; it does not report specifically on lead levels.6 May  2015 -- Tests reveal high lead levels in 2 more homes in Flint.2 Jul 2015 -- An EPA administrator tells Flint's mayor that ""it would be premature to draw any conclusions"" based on a leaked internal EPA memo regarding lead.22 Jul 2015 -- The state Governor's chief of staff, expresses concern about the lead issue in an email, and asks about Flint test results, blood testing and the state's response.17 Aug 2015 -- Based on results showing lead levels at 11 parts per billion from January to June 2015, the Department of Environmental Quality tells Flint to optimize corrosion control.2 Sep 2015 -- An expert on municipal water quality and professor at Virginia Tech, reports that corrosiveness of water is causing lead to leach into the supply. Soon after, the Department of Environmental Quality disputes those conclusions.24-25 Sep 2015 -- A group of doctors led by Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha of Hurley Medical Center in Flint urges the city to stop using the Flint River for water after finding high levels of lead in the blood of children. State regulators insist the water is safe.""D.E.Q. and D.C.H. feel that some in Flint are taking the very sensitive issue of children's exposure to lead and trying to turn it into a political football claiming the departments are underestimating the impacts on the populations and particularly trying to shift responsibility to the state."" -- [the governor's chief of staff] in an email, referring to the departments of environmental quality and community health.28 Sep 2015 -- The governor is briefed on lead problems in a phone call with the state environment department and federal officials.1 Oct 2015 -- Flint city officials urges residents to stop drinking water after government epidemiologists validate Dr. Hanna-Attisha's finding of high lead levels. [The governor] orders the distribution of filters, the testing of water in schools, and the expansion of water and blood testing.16 Oct 2015 -- Flint reconnects to Detroit's water. Residents are advised not to use unfiltered tap water for drinking, cooking or bathing.19 Oct 2015 -- The Department of Environmental Quality director, reports that his staff used inappropriate federal protocol for corrosion control.21 Oct 2015 -- [The governor] announces that an independent advisory task force will review water use and testing in Flint.9 Dec 2015 -- Flint adds additional corrosion controls.14 Dec 2015 -- Flint declares an emergency.29 Dec 2015 -- The task force says the Department of Environmental Quality must be held accountable. The director of the state environment agency, resigns.""We believe the primary responsibility for what happened in Flint rests with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality."" -- according to Flint Water Advisory Task Force.5 Jan 2016 - [The governor] declares a state of emergency for Genesee County, which includes Flint.12 Jan 2016 National Guard troops arrived to help distribute bottled water. 16 Jan 2016 -- President Obama declares a state of emergency in the city and surrounding county, allowing the Federal Emergency Management Agency to provide up to USD 5 million in aid.20 Jan 2016 -- President Obama says he ""would be beside myself"" if he were a parent in the city. The Michigan House approves USD 28 million requested by the governor to assist the city.Sources: Office of Gov. Rick Snyder of Michigan, the Michigan auditor general's office and the United States Environmental Protection Agency.[Byline: Jeremy C.F. Lin, Jean Rutter and Haeyoun Park]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: 29 Jan 2016Source: NY Times [edited]<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/30/us/flint-weighs-scope-of-harm-to-children-caused-by-lead-in-water.html?rref=collection%2Fsectioncollection%2Fus&action=click&contentCollection=uså¨ion=rank&module=package&version=highlights&contentPlacement=1&pgtype=sectionfront>A resident's (designate QT) 2-month-old daughter wriggled on an exam table last week as her pediatrician ticked off questions that have become essential for every parent of young children here.""So what are you guys doing for water -- what are you drinking?"" asked the doctor, Mona Hanna-Attisha.""I have a whole bunch of bottled water that I picked up,"" said Ms QT, 26, assuring the doctor that the family had been drinking it for a few months, since the gravity of Flint's water crisis came to light.""And before that you were using tap water?""""Yes,"" Ms QT replied, as her other child, a 1-year-old, (designated K), toddled around.Dr. Hanna-Attisha would waste no time adding K and his sister, (designated T), to a new database of children under 6 who may have been exposed to lead in Flint's water, a group she said she (the Dr.) believed could number 8000.Of all the concerns raised by the contamination of Flint's water supply, none are more chilling than the possibility that children in this tattered city may have suffered irreversible damage to their developing brains and nervous systems from exposure to lead.New concerns surfaced Friday [29 Jan 2016] when officials said that recent tests of unfiltered tap water in Flint had found levels of lead in some samples higher than what filters distributed to residents were designed to remove.Nicole Lurie, assistant secretary for preparedness and response for the United States Public Health Service, said 26 water samples, out of nearly 4000 collected, contained lead at levels higher than 150 parts per billion. The Environmental Protection Agency recommends that lead in drinking water should be below 15 parts per billion.Flint residents received filters designed to remove lead up to 150 parts per billion, Ms. Lurie said, adding that they could still be effective above that level.""This does not mean that we think there's a problem with the filters,"" she said. ""In fact, everything we know tells us that they are performing well."" [Does this mean they tested the drinking water from resident faucets to determine the filters were capturing all the lead above 150 ppb? - Mod.TG]Still, she said, all residents should have their water tested as soon as possible. Officials also cautioned that children under 6 and pregnant women should use bottled water for drinking and preparing food. [Who is paying for residents to have their water tested? Was there a notice published regarding where to take the water for testing or did the city lab have the capabilities? - Mod.TG]At the same time, many are turning their attention to the future, when the effects of consuming lead-laced water for months may be all too evident.At the center of those efforts is Dr. Hanna-Attisha, whose research documenting a spike in children's blood lead levels forced dismissive government officials to acknowledge the water crisis last fall. With her colleagues at Hurley Children's Hospital, where she directs the pediatric residency program, she is at the forefront of the scramble to put in place the resources so that every child who needs extra help learning or overcoming medical problems will have support for years to come. [Typically physicians don't do lead testing without some clinical signs or something made this physician suspicious of lead intoxication. Lead testing is not usually on a wellness or health check visit. - Mod.TG]Decades of research have found that exposure to even low levels of lead can profoundly affect children's growth, behavior and intelligence over time. Studies have linked elevated lead levels in blood to learning disabilities, problems with attention and fine motor coordination, and even violent behavior.Younger children and fetuses are especially vulnerable because of their developing brains and nervous systems, which is why the efforts here will focus on children 5 and younger.Underlying the problem are the troubling conditions prevalent among low-income children and their families in cities like Flint: spotty access to doctors and health care services; a dearth of healthy foods; living conditions so poor that many of the children may have already been exposed to lead poisoning from the paint in their homes; parents with limited time and financial resources.The doctors here said they would focus on improving the diets of affected children and expanding education programs like Head Start, the federally funded preschool program for low-income children, which has a waiting list in Flint. Dr. Hanna-Attisha has submitted dozens of recommendations to the governor, state legislators and federal officials.Mr. Snyder and the State Legislature have so far allocated USD 28 million in emergency state spending for Flint. Some of the money will provide initial services, like health assessments and home visits from nurses, to lead-exposed children. Mr. Snyder has also asked the federal government to expand Medicaid to cover every Flint resident younger than 21, regardless of income level. And Democrats in Congress said on Thursday [28 Jan 2016] that they would seek USD 600 million in federal aid for Michigan to help Flint.Local philanthropic groups have set up a charitable fund with the goal of improving health outcomes for children exposed to lead, including through Dr. Hanna-Attisha's project, the Pediatric Public Health Initiative. Psychologists, nutritionists and child development experts are among the participants in the project, which Hurley is overseeing with Michigan State University's College of Human Medicine, where Dr. Hanna-Attisha is an assistant professor of pediatrics.""We have a unique opportunity to build a model public health program here,"" Dr. Hanna-Attisha said. ""We have to throw every single evidence-based resource at these kids, starting now.""It is impossible to gauge how each child will be affected, partly because the developmental effects of lead poisoning may take years to emerge. A flurry of lead testing has taken place since October, when the Genessee County Health Department declared a public health emergency. The agency told residents to stop drinking the water, which was coming from the Flint River, rather than Lake Huron, in an attempt to save money.Experts say the testing may provide false reassurance. Most residents have probably switched to drinking bottled water, and since lead can be detected in the blood for only about a month, test results may not reflect the extent of their exposure.She emphasized, however, that not every child exposed to lead would suffer ill effects. Kim Dietrich, a professor of environmental health at the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, said that based partly on the blood lead levels of children in Dr. Hanna-Attisha's study, he did not think serious long-term health problems would be widespread.Dr. Hanna-Attisha and others are urging families to feed their children foods rich in calcium, iron and vitamin C, which can help minimize the amount of lead their bodies absorb.Dr. Hanna-Attisha said that while lead was the primary concern, the researchers also worried about the effect of total trihalomethanes, or TTHMs, chemical compounds found in Flint's water after the city pumped extra chlorine into the system to address bacteria problems after switching to river water. Some studies have linked TTHMs in water to higher miscarriage rates.Many in Flint have had skin irritation and rashes in the past 18 months, which Dr. Hanna-Attisha attributes to the extra chlorine and TTHMs in the water. Because they were slow to make the connection, she and other doctors are trying to make up for it, with checkups for young children presenting a prime opportunity.[Byline: Julie Bosman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>[While this water situation is very sad, I wonder how many physicians are recognizing lead poisoning in children, or in adults? Is this same scenario being played out in other areas across the US, and is there a children's advocate such as Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Should lead be part of every wellness check for children and adults? It seems that we (municipalities, cities, and communities) do a reasonable job of monitoring water supplies for coliforms and perhaps other infectious agents, but are falling short of monitoring for non-infectious contaminants.The situation in Flint was a subacute to chonic situation that points out the flaws in how this problem is approached, and is leading to acute/sub-acute toxicities as the scope and magnitude of the problems comes to light. Then it appears to be an acute situation. It has, in reality, as the time line of the 1st article shows, been building up to this crisis moment.When corrosion control is withdrawn from the drinking water, then the substances that have deposited within pipes will begin to leach back into the water. So the level of the toxic agent, lead in the case of Flint, slowly rises. Other articles have reported residents complaining of foul odors and colors of the water. This should have been a warning sign indicating something was not right. Please see ProMED-mail posting 20160126.3965610 for a more complete understanding of substances attaching to and leaching off of water pipes.Likewise, high levels of chemicals controlling corrosion or other issues may be just as dangerous. Sadly situations start slowly and then reach a crisis point. Perhaps the only suitable way to solve such situation is to monitor for chemicals put into the water supply to control corrosion or coliforms but to also monitor for a variety of heavy metals, such as cadmium, lead, mercury, or excessive levels of zinc, or sulfate or other substances frequently found in water. Officials should listen when several residents complain of foul smelling or discolored water. According the Michigan government's web site, there is weekly posting for lead levels in children and adults, not only in the Flint area and Genesee county but statewide by age and groups. Remember adults can be affected by lead as well.Here is a link to one of the latest:<https://www.michigan.gov/documents/deq/Elevated_Blood_Lead_Level_Report_-_Jan._15_2016_511054_7.pdf>The update includes a chart of blood lead levels over time, starting in 2010, and it also includes annual numbers of persons tested, by age group and by blood lead level. So then are physicians reporting this? Is it mandatory to report any level? Are they even looking at this website and tracking the rise or fall of lead levels in people? Is anyone monitoring this website and raising any alarms? Based on this website, it seems lead is a larger problem than just this one county. Lead in water is a chronic problem that manifests as a sudden (acute) problem, such as happened in Flint, Michigan.Readers should see the 3rd article on ProMED-mail posting 20160126.3965610 regarding the number of counties posting lead levels. Another resource is: <http://www.vox.com/2016/1/21/10811004/lead-poisoning-cities-us>Are communities regularly monitoring lead in water? If not then it may be time to monitor lead as frequently as any of the other chemicals added to the water. Toxic metals such as arsenic, cadmium, lead, and mercury are ubiquitous, have no beneficial role in human homeostasis, and contribute to noncommunicable chronic diseases. These articles do not tell us if chelation therapy is being used. Chelation is the process of binding heavy metal to render it harmless and eventually remove it from the body. As research progresses, harms more subtle than acute poisoning are seen at lower and lower body burdens of heavy metals. For example, early lead exposure is now found to cause IQ decrements at a blood level below 2‰Ûäug/dL [1]. The blood lead reference value at which the US Centers for Disease Control action recommends investigation and remediation of a child's environmental exposures is 5‰Ûäåµg/dL, while chelation is recommended at 9 times that level above 45‰Ûäug/dL [2].Some plants produce chelating compounds [3], and metallothionein content of foods may affect bioavailability as well as metabolism of toxic metals such as cadmium [4]. The physician mentioned in the article advocated feeding the households with some of the naturally beneficial plants. Some foods have been suggested to reduce absorption or reabsorption of toxic metals and to support natural detoxification pathways.Some work done in animals and successfully used today indicates that some chelating agents are effective for some acute and chronic heavy metal intoxications. There is also history of chelation therapy being used in humans, which much data coming out of some of the wars.Dimercaprol (British Anti-Lewisite, BAL), the 1st antidote to an arsenical nerve gas, is a dithiol prepared in an oil base and given only by intramuscular injection (painful). It has a narrow therapeutic window and is commonly prepared with peanut oil, posing a risk of allergic reaction. BAL has been largely supplanted by dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA or succimer) and dimercaptopropane sulfonate (DMPS), that were extensively researched in Russia, China, and Japan, a half century ago [5]. These dithiols, with greater water solubility, are being administered as oral, intravenous, suppository, or transdermal preparations. The absorbed dose is excreted with a half-life of approximately 3 hours; longer in children and people with mercury toxicity.Oral administration of DMSA may be limited by intestinal dysbiosis. Oral absorption is approximately 20 percent, with most DMSA in plasma being protein bound (95 percent, mainly to albumin); only a very small amount is present as free drug. DMSA is extensively metabolized in humans to mixed disulfides of cysteine. Ten to 25 percent of an orally administered dose of DMSA is excreted in urine; the majority within 24 hours and most as DMSA-cysteine disulfide conjugates. The remainder is largely eliminated in the faeces [5-8]. DMSA increases urinary excretion of arsenic, cadmium, lead, methylmercury, and inorganic mercury, with removal from animals' brains of lead and methylmercury. Excretion of essential metals like zinc, iron, calcium, and magnesium is much less than with CaNa2EDTA (Calcium Disodium EDTA), with potentially higher losses of copper in humans. Although frequently administered orally, intravenous, rectal, and transdermal routes are in clinical use. A rare side effect is mucocutaneous eruptions and toxic epidermal necrosis, that resolves when the medication is stopped.DMPS oral absorption is approximately 39 percent , higher than that of DMSA [9]. Solutions are relatively stable, so DMPS is administered intravenously more frequently than DMSA. DMPS is rapidly converted to a disulphide form and is excreted largely in the urine as acyclic and cyclic disulfide chelates, with an overall half-life of approximately 20 hours following intravenous administration [9]. A significant proportion is also excreted in bile. DMPS increases urinary excretion of arsenic, cadmium, lead, methylmercury, and inorganic mercury. In a study of the DMPS challenge test there was significantly increased excretion of copper, selenium, zinc, and magnesium, necessitating replenishment of these essential minerals orally or intravenously before and after treatment [10]. In comparing the efficacy of the dithiol chelators in animals, DMSA was superior in removal of methylmercury, including from animal brains. Although DMPS did not affect levels in the brain, it was superior at removing methylmercury from the kidney [5]. In mice, cadmium was removed more effectively by DMSA than DMPS [11].CaNa2EDTA (Calcium Disodium EDTA)is not metabolized and EDTA chelates are rapidly excreted, principally in the urine. With only oxygen atoms for coordination bonds, EDTA binds lead and cadmium strongly, eliminating them in the urine. Clinical experience is that CaNa2EDTA will result in increasing mercury excretion once other more well bound minerals such as lead and cadmium are depleted. Overall CaNa2EDTA(Calcium Disodium EDTA) causes greater losses of essential minerals than DMSA or DMPS. Chelation therapy, like any therapy has its pros and cons. Three deaths associated with chelation therapy have been reported, related to hypocalcemia resulting in cardiac arrest after use of Na2EDTA [12]. These were in fact drug errors and should not reflect on the safety of CaNa2EDTA, the form generally indicated for chelation of toxic metals [13]. CaNa2EDTA is distributed mainly in the extracellular fluids and 1 of its major perceived drawbacks is that of redistributing lead from other tissues to the brain. In one study, treatment with DMSA after exposure to inorganic mercury caused an elevation of mercury in motor axons, likely due to redistribution of mercury, which was mobilized from nonneural tissues such as the kidneys and liver [14]. Mixed reports indicate that EDTA does not cross the blood-brain barrier, but this is in contrast to reports that EDTA may cause increased symptoms of lead poisoning or mercurialism [15]. Transient increases in hepatic transaminase activity have been reported with CaNa2EDTA, DMSA, and DMPS, but hepatic toxicity resolves with discontinuation of the medication. Skin lesions associated with CaNa2EDTA may relate to zinc deficiency. A single trial published in the New England Journal of Medicine (2001) is cited by authorities who recommend that chelation therapy be used only at highly elevated blood lead levels in children [16]. In an early, ambitious trial using DMSA chelation therapy in 780 children enrolled in the ""Cincinnati cohort,"" blood lead levels were temporarily lowered in children receiving the medication compared with the control group; however, at 36-month followup blood lead levels in the treated children had rebounded. At this 3-year mark, there were no significant differences between treatment and control groups in terms of blood lead levels nor neurocognitive outcomes [17]. This trial used a very aggressive protocol, with 26 days of therapy for 1, 2, or 3 rounds. Currently, chelating agents are typically administered for multiple shorter periods, with time between courses for the body's minerals to become repleted. This aggressive therapy could very well have depleted essential minerals from this vulnerable population (poor, inner-city, and black/Hispanic children). The vitamin and mineral supplementation may have been inadequate and may have been countered by concomitant administration of the chelator (doses and adherence to treatment for supplemental minerals were not reported). Shannon et al. have offered similar criticisms [18].The situation in Flint, Michigan (and likely other places in the USA) is not pleasant or easy, either in terms of cleaning the water or treating the people. Perhaps the best thought is that all municipalities, communities should be doing heavy metal (lead, mercury, cadmium at a minimum) regularly on their water sources. Portions of this comment were extracted from: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3654245/>This moderator wishes to thank Jody Lanard M.D. <jody@psandman.com> and Peter M. Sandman PhD <peter@psandman.com> of The Peter Sandman Risk Communication Website> for their assistance in locating the Michigan website for reporting lead levels in children and adults. It should be noted ProMED-mail does not intend to report all chronic heavy metal cases, however, as mentioned earlier, these cases often appear acutely but have roots in a chronic problem. We wanted to make our readers aware of the long standing issue that has been brought to light because of residents and physicians persisting to report what seemed and is abnormal. - Mod.TGReferences:1. Lanphear BP, Hornung R, Khoury J, et al. Low-level environmental lead exposure and children's intellectual function: an international pooled analysis. Environmental Health Perspectives. 2005;113(7):894-899. [PMC free article] [PubMed]2. National Center for Environmental Health. New Blood Lead Level Information. 2012. <http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/ACCLPP/blood_lead_levels.htm>.3. Pal R, Rai JPN. Phytochelatins: peptides involved in heavy metal detoxification. Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology. 2010;160(3):945-963. [PubMed]4. Asagba SO. Role of diet in absorption and toxicity of oral cadmium--a review of literature. African Journal of Biotechnology. 2009;8(25)5. Aposhian HV. DMSA and DMPS--water soluble antidotes for heavy metal poisoning. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology. 1983;23:193-215. [PubMed]6. Asledu P, Moulton T, Blum CB, Roldan E, Lolacono NJ, Graziano JH. Metabolism of meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid in lead-poisoned children and normal adults. Environmental Health Perspectives. 1995;103(7-8):734-739. [PMC free article] [PubMed]7. Bradberry S, Vale A. Dimercaptosuccinic acid (succimer; DMSA) in inorganic lead poisoning. Clinical Toxicology. 2009;47(7):617-631. [PubMed]8. Bradberry S, Vale A. A comparison of sodium calcium edetate (edetate calcium disodium) and succimer (DMSA) in the treatment of inorganic lead poisoning Sodium calcium edetate and DMSA in lead poisoning. Clinical Toxicology. 2009;47(9):841-858. [PubMed]9. Hurlbut KM, Maiorino RM, Mayersohn M, Dart RC, Bruce DC, Aposhian HV. Determination and metabolism of dithiol chelating agents XVI: pharmacokinetics of 2,3-dimercapto-1-propanesulfonate after intravenous administration to human volunteers. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 1994;268(2):662-668. [PubMed]10. Torres-AlanÌ s O, Garza-Ocanas L, Bernal MA, Pineyro-Lopez A. Urinary excretion of trace elements in humans after sodium 2,3-dimercaptopropane-1-sulfonate challenge test. Journal of Toxicology--Clinical Toxicology. 2000;38(7):697-700. [PubMed]11. Andersen O, Nielsen JB. Oral cadmium chloride intoxication in mice: effects of penicillamine, dimercaptosuccinic acid and related compounds. Pharmacology & Toxicology. 1988;63:386-389. [PubMed]12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Deaths associated with hypocalcemia from chelation therapy--Texas, Pennsylvania, and Oregon, 2003-2005. Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report. 2006;55:204-207. [PubMed]13. Risher JF, Amler SN. Mercury exposure: evaluation and intervention. The inappropriate use of chelating agents in the diagnosis and treatment of putative mercury poisoning. NeuroToxicology. 2005;26(4):691-699. [PubMed]14. Flora SJS, Pachauri V. Chelation in metal intoxication. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2010;7:2745-2788. [PMC free article] [PubMed]15. Aposhian MM, Maiorino RM, Xu Z, Aposhian HV. Sodium 2,3-dimercapto-1-propanesulfonate (DMPS) treatment does not redistribute lead or mercury to the brain of rats. Toxicology. 1996;109(1):49-55. [PubMed]16. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Environmental Health. Lead exposure in children: prevention, detection, and management. Pediatrics. 2005;116:1036-1046. [PubMed]17. Rogan WJ, Dietrich KN, Ware JH, et al. The effect of chelation therapy with succimer on neuropsychological development in children exposed to lead. New England Journal of Medicine. 2001;344(19):1421-1426. [PubMed]18. Shannon M, Woolf A, Binns H. Chelation therapy in children exposed to lead. The New England Journal of Medicine. 2001;345:1212-1213. [PubMed]- Mod.TG]
