News-Sentinel [edited]<http://www.news-sentinel.com/news/local/Hepatitis-C-cases-up-by-61-percent-in-in-Allen-County-in-2015>Hepatitis C cases up by 61 percent in Allen County in 2015---------------The 61 percent jump in the number of hepatitis C cases and 30 percent climb in the number of HIV cases in Allen County in 2015 are matters of grave concern, said Fort Wayne-Allen County Health Commissioner Dr. Deborah McMahan. According to McMahan, Jeff Markley, executive director of the Positive Resource Center, said the surrounding counties have had similar increases in HIV in 2015.""We see the trend, I think the numbers speak for themselves. I want to be proactive. I don't want to wait. Addiction is hard enough to deal with, much less addiction with HIV or hepatitis C; I want to minimize the potential problems that our children will have to pay for,"" McMahan said.McMahan said that in February 2016 the Allen County Commissioners will meet and hear testimony as to why an intravenous-needle exchange program is needed now. They will then have 2 weeks to reflect on the issue before voting. If passed, it would move on to the state level, where the Indiana State Department of Health would need to declare it an emergency situation before the needle exchange program could start.A lot of good things can come out of the needle-exchange program, in addition to the screenings for hepatitis C and HIV. McMahan said Park Center will be there for addiction counseling and to help plug people into the services they may need.IV drug use increased by 9 percent in 2015 while statewide it is less then 1 percent, which is also cause for concern. The health department would like to increase the testing and include information for care providers to know what to look for.The Positive Resource Center would be used as the site for the needle exchange program, and McMahan said they have applied for funding through grants for the materials they would hand out in the needle exchange packets. The cost is only about $3 an individual. That's very minimal when one considers the $80 000 individual treatment cost for hepatitis C, a cost that many insurance companies won't pay for. It was only recently they heard from health department personnel in Scott County that several people had been given the go-ahead for treatment from Indiana HIP 2.0 for their hepatitis C.[Byline: Ellie Bogue] --Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.orrg>[The implementation of a needle exchange program is vitally important in playing a role in preventing bloodborne viral infection transmission. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/217>.]
