The Daily Independent [edited]<http://www.dailyindependent.com/news/health-dept-organizes-needle-drive-in-face-of-local-spread/article_153b4208-c95f-11e5-9dc5-a313ed40fdbf.html>The Ashland-Boyd County Health Department is planning a needle-exchange program to prevent the further spread of hepatitis C in the area, epidemiologist Kristy Bolen said. The leading cause for the spread of the disease has been through dirty needles used by drug users, Boyd County Coroner Mark Hammond said.He said the number of hepatitis C deaths stayed steady in the area until about 2011 or 2012 when ""it shot up dramatically."" But Hammond said it isn't just a local problem -- it's a statewide and national issue.Hammond provided The Daily Independent with statistics from the CDC, which stated, ""The state of Kentucky is no. 1 in the nation with 4.1 hepatitis C cases per 100 000 residents."" The national average is 0.6 per 100 000 cases of hepatitis C. According to the Northern Kentucky Health Department, that region of the state has a much higher rate of cases:‰Ûö13 per 100 000 residents.Bolen said northern Kentucky has a needle-exchange program, as well as Lexington, Louisville, Jessamine County, and Carter and Elliott counties' Little Sandy Health Department. There is also a needle-exchange program in place in Huntington.Hammond said heroin is the culprit in the rise of hepatitis C cases and although political leaders consistently campaign to fight the drug epidemic, little has changed. ""What I see is that no matter how much enforcement we have and no matter what we do as far as education, those numbers are climbing right back up,"" Hammond said. ""We had 25 overdoses last year [2015] and most were heroin overdoses."" According to the CDC, 45 percent of Kentucky residents addicted to heroin were also addicted to opioid pain killers. Cases of hepatitis C in Kentucky increased more than 50 percent from 2007 to 2011.Hammond said heroin has risen in popularity since the government cracked down on pill mills across the country. The reason, he said, is because heroin is so cheap. Hammond explained that users can typically buy a hit of heroin for USD 10 or USD 15, while pills are priced at nearly USD 30 per pill, or USD 1 per milligram. ""It (heroin) is here to stay, and it just keeps getting bigger and bigger,""‰ÛöHammond said.The coroner is also concerned about heroin users getting ""dirty"" heroin, laced with other drugs that can easily cause an overdose.Bolen said the needle-exchange program can be used as a tool to stymie the spread of hepatitis C, while also giving the health department an opportunity to educate addicts coming to pick up clean needles. ""We (the health department) look at it like prevention, not enabling,""‰ÛöBolen said. ""Just like we hand out condoms to prevent the spread of STDs, it's a way to give them (drug users) something to prevent the spread of hepatitis C. ""Talk to former injection drug users and they'll tell you they'll use whatever they can find -- a dirty needle or a clean needle -- to feed the addiction.""The Ashland-Boyd County Health Department is still seeking approval for the program from its board of health and local governments. Bolen said the department is also trying to choose a location for the program that would be most accessible to drug users. ""We're not really that close to rolling it out, but we're also aware there is a need in the community for this type of program,""‰ÛöBolen said. ""We're trying to do our best to do all the hard stuff now so that everything will go much more smoothly when we're ready to approach the community.""[Byline: Lana Bellamy]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The numbers reported per 100 000 are those of incidence, that is, acute cases of the infection. Since most cases of acute hepatitis C are unrecognized, these are always underestimated. The increase in number of deaths from hepatitis C is not directly related to the number of new cases. The mortality is almost always related to the decades-later complications of the infection, cirrhosis and carcinoma of the liver. These complications are not inevitable and can be minimized by avoiding overuse of alcohol and by the use of one of the newer, but at this point quite expensive, HCV antiviral regimens.In the absence of a vaccine, infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are needed. - Mod.LLThe state of Kentucky can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/29048>. A county map can be seen at <http://geology.com/county-map/kentucky-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
