Inverell Times [edited]<http://www.inverelltimes.com.au/story/3702121/blue-green-algae-red-alert-warning-for-lake-inverell/>Blue-green algae red alert warning for Lake Inverell----------------------------------------------------The Barwon Regional Algal Coordinating Committee (RACC) issued a red alert level warning (high alert) for blue-green algae in Lake Inverell [Inverell, New South Wales] on Tuesday [2 Feb 2016].The recent spate of hot weather in the region is the most likely cause of the algal bloom.  A high alert indicates that waters are unsuitable for recreational use such as swimming, or primary contact and may also pose a threat to pets.Domestic pets should also be kept away from the area, especially dogs which are particularly susceptible as they can ingest algae by licking their coats.The species of blue-green algae identified are potentially toxic and may cause gastroenteritis in humans if consumed and skin and eye irritations after contact.Boiling the water does not inactivate algal toxins.Algal blooms can develop in a 24 hour period and can spread rapidly in a water body.  Existing blooms are also subject to prevailing winds and can be moved about over wide areas in a short time.People should avoid any water that appears bright green, where obvious green scums are present, or a distinctive odour is noticeable.  Blue-green algae are usually very obvious, appearing as clumps or specks in the water and are often associated with a strong musty or earthy odour.  People are advised not to enter the water, and are further advised not to drink untreated water or bathe in untreated water drawn from the lake whilst a red level warning is in place.Livestock owners in the vicinity are reminded to continue to check stock water supplies, including farm dams, for blue-green algae and to remove stock from areas where surface scum is visible or blue-green algae are suspected, as blue-green algae are known to cause stock illness or even death.There is some evidence that small quantities of algal toxins may enter fish flesh when a bloom produces toxins.  Any fish caught in water affected by a bloom should be cleaned and washed thoroughly in uncontaminated water and any internal organs disposed of before consumption.  People should not eat mussels, crayfish or the internal organs of fish from red alert areas.This red level warning will remain in place until such time as the Barwon Regional Algal Coordinating Committee advises that it has been lifted.Information updates about blue-green algae blooms and Red Level Warning areas can be obtained from the Regional Algal Coordinating Committee freecall Algal Information Hotline on 1800 999 457.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[What is a red alert? According to the New South Wales (NSW) Department of Primary Industries for Water (<http://www.water.nsw.gov.au/water-management/water-quality/algal-information>):Red: These alert levels represent 'bloom' conditions. The water will appear green and may have strong, musty or organically polluted odours. Blue-green algae may be visible as clumps or as scums. The 'blooms' should be considered to be toxic to humans and animals, and the water should not be used for potable water supply (without prior treatment), stock watering, or for recreation.Blue-green algae (also known as cyanobacteria) are the only group of algae to be toxic in freshwaters. They are microscopic bacteria living in water, and are capable of photosynthesising which is why they are often called algae. Though microscopic, when they form colonies and accumulate together they can become visible to the naked eye. Blue-green algae can produce potent liver and neurotoxins as well as skin irritants. However, not all blue-green algae are toxic, and even toxic species do not always produce toxins.Many blue-green algal species are able to float and can sometimes be seen as green scums on water, or they just colour the water green. For more information on identifying blooms, use the Key to Blooms: <http://www.water.nsw.gov.au/water-management/water-quality/algal-information/key-to-blooms>.Toxic marine and estuarine algae can also affect recreational water use. Some of these algae produce toxins that can cause illness if ingested and others can cause skin irritations. These algae often cannot be seen, but some cause red coloration to water -- a phenomenon known as red tides.Blue-green algae can pose a risk to human health because of the toxins they produce. These toxins can damage the liver and neurological system of both humans and animals and in severe cases can cause death. The cell walls of all blue-green algae contain contact irritants which can cause gastrointestinal, skin, eye and respiratory irritations to humans and animals.Toxins produced by blue-green algae-----------------------------------Toxins are compounds that have a harmful effect on other cells, tissues and organisms. In the natural environment, these toxins are generally contained within the blue-green algal cell but they are released into the water when the cell is damaged or dies.Blue-green algal toxins can be divided into the following groups:1. Hepatotoxins- Hepatotoxins cause blood to collect in the liver causing circulatory shock and can lead to death by internal hemorrhaging.- Hepatotoxins can cause weakness, vomiting and diarrhoea.- Nodularin and microcystin are 2 types of hepatotoxins.- Nodularin is produced by the algal species _Nodularia spumigena_.- In NSW, microcystin is produced by _Microcystis_.- Microcystins can bioaccumulate in aquatic invertebrates such as mussels so aquatic animals caught from water where there is an algal bloom should not be eaten.2. Neurotoxins- Neurotoxins interfere with the functioning of the nervous system and can cause death of humans and animals within minutes by causing paralysis of the respiratory muscles.- In NSW, a neurotoxin known as saxitoxin is produced by the blue-green alga _Anabaena_.- Marine dinoflagellates (red tides) produce saxitoxins (also known as paralytic shellfish poisons) which concentrate in shellfish and have been known to cause death in humans.3. Non-specific Toxins- Cylindrospermopsin is a non-specific toxin that in NSW is produced by the blue-green algae _Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii_ and _Aphanizomenon ovalisporum_.- This toxin is a relatively slow acting toxin that damages most organs in the body including the liver.4. Dermatoxic Lipopolysachharides- When non-toxic species of blue-green algae are present at concentrations above 10 cubic mm per litre, the water may still pose a risk to recreational and domestic users as all blue-green algae have lipopolysachharides in their cell walls.- Lipopolysachharides are less toxic than hepatotoxins or neurotoxins but are significant in terms of water supply for drinking, showering and recreation.- Lipopolysachharides have been associated with outbreaks of gastroenteritis, skin and eye irritations and hayfever, in humans that have come into contact with algal blooms. Humans that contact lipopolysachharides in the aerosol form (fine spray e.g. sprinkler) may suffer asthma, eczema, and blisters in the lining of the nose and mouth.Incidents of blue-green algal poisoning----------------------------------------Lake Alexandrina, AustraliaThe 1st recorded incidence of animal poisoning from a blue-green algal bloom was in Lake Alexandrina, Australia in the late 1800s. Cattle, horses, pigs, sheep and dogs died after drinking water covered by a scum of the blue-green algae _Nodularia spumigena_.Animal deaths from blue-green algae have also been reported in North and South America, Europe, and Africa. The major cause of deaths in animals is from liver poisoning and neurotoxicity that leads to respiratory failure.The State Algal Advisory Committee has endorsed the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC 2008) Recreational Guidelines for algae.Research had shown that while all species of blue-green algae produce skin irritants, not all species are capable of producing liver toxins and neurotoxins. Not all toxic marine algae are known to be hazardous to recreational water users.The interim NHMRC (2008) guidelines are different to the previous NSW guidelines which used a level of 15 000 cell/mL for recreational use of water and High, Medium and Low categories. The new interim guidelines use a Green, Amber and Red colour alert framework and are more conservative than previous guidelines.For freshwaters---------------A Red Level Action Mode is in place when greater than 50 000 cells of _Microcystis aeruginosa_ are present or a biovolume of all toxin producing cyanobacteria exceeds 4 mm3/L. Red Level is also triggered if the total of all cyanobacteria (toxic and non toxic) exceeds 10 mm3/L or scums are present for long periods. At Red Mode, Local and Health Authorities should be contacted to assess risks to recreational users and appropriate measures should be taken to warn water users. Water should not be used for primary recreation.While much of this comment has focused on the human health issue, pets can be similarly affected. Pets tend to die very quickly from the blue-green algae toxins. Portions of this comment have been extracted from: <http://www.water.nsw.gov.au/water-management/water-quality/algal-information>. - Mod.TGInverell is a small town with a population of approx. 10 000, so this alert is probably of only local concern. - Mod.JWA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/36147>.]
