Hong Kong Centre for Health Protection (CHP) press release [edited]<http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201602/05/P201602050438.htm>The Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health (DH) today (5 Feb 2016) received notification of 19 additional human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) with onset of symptoms between 21 Dec 2015 and 25 Jan this year [2016] from the National Health and Family Planning Commission, and again urged the public to maintain strict personal, food and environmental hygiene both locally and during travel.The patients comprise 11 men and 8 women aged from 42 to 91, 4 of whom (3 men and 1 woman) have died. 11 cases are from Zhejiang, 5 are from Jiangsu and 3 are from Fujian.""H5 and H7N9 avian influenza viruses can cause severe infections in humans. Due to the seasonal pattern, our risk assessment shows that the activity of avian influenza viruses is expected to remain at a high level in winter months. Human H5N6 and H7N9 cases have been recorded in the Mainland since this winter. Locally, birds positive for H5N6 were also detected this winter. The public, particularly poultry traders, travellers and those who may visit the Mainland in the coming Lunar New Year, should be highly alert. Do not visit poultry markets and farms. Avoid poultry contact. We will continue to monitor the regional and global disease situation,"" a spokesman for the CHP said.From 2013 to date, 702 human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) have been reported by the Mainland health authorities.The DH's Port Health Office conducts health surveillance measures at all boundary control points. Thermal imaging systems are in place for body temperature checks on inbound travellers. Suspected cases will be immediately referred to public hospitals for follow-up.The display of posters and broadcast of health messages in departure and arrival halls as health education for travellers is under way. The travel industry and other stakeholders are regularly updated on the latest information.Travellers, especially those returning from avian influenza-affected areas with fever or respiratory symptoms, should immediately wear masks, seek medical attention and reveal their travel history to doctors. Health-care professionals should pay special attention to patients who might have had contact with poultry, birds or their droppings in affected areas.The public should remain vigilant and take heed of the advice against avian influenza below:- Do not visit live poultry markets and farms. Avoid contact with poultry, birds and their droppings;- If contact has been made, thoroughly wash hands with soap;- Avoid entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered and contact with surfaces which might be contaminated by droppings of poultry or other animals;- Poultry and eggs should be thoroughly cooked before eating;- Wash hands frequently with soap, especially before touching the mouth, nose or eyes, handling food or eating; after going to the toilet or touching public installations or equipment (including escalator handrails, elevator control panels and door knobs); and when hands are dirtied by respiratory secretions after coughing or sneezing;- Cover the nose and mouth while sneezing or coughing, hold the spit with a tissue and put it into a covered dustbin;- Avoid crowded places and contact with fever patients; and- Wear masks when respiratory symptoms develop or when taking care of fever patients.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>[Note that these cases are not current cases, but rather from 21 Dec 2015 -- 25 Jan 2016. Additional information on the fatal case reported in ProMED mail Avian influenza, human (18): China, H7N9, H5N6, CHP report  20160205.3995719: ""The ... H7N9 patient is a 48-year-old man who died today [04 Feb 2016] in a hospital in Yongzhou, according Xinhua, China's state news agency. Local officials said his cause of death was liver and kidney failure, but the man, also from Lingling district, tested positive for the virus. The source of his H7N9 infection is unknown. <http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2016/02/news-scan-feb-04-2016> - Communicated by Mary Marshall <mjm2020@googlemail.com>""Maps of China can be found at <http://www.sacu.org/maps/provmap.png> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/5695>. - Mod.LK]
