The Journal of Dermatology Online ISSN: 1346-8138 [edited]<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1346-8138.13253/abstract;jsessionid=F415CC07E5DA0F5ADE7DB845E2FC33BF.f02t02?userIsAuthenticated=false&deniedAccessCustomisedMessage>Makoto Kondo, Shigehiro Akachi, Katsuhiko Ando, Tatsuma Nomura, Keiichi Yamanaka and Hitoshi Mizutani. 2 Japanese siblings affected with chikungunya fever with different clinical courses: Imported infections from the Cook Islands.Abstract2 Japanese siblings visited the Cook Islands on business and stayed for 2 months. The sister developed a high fever, arthralgia, erythema and leg edema on the day after returning to Japan. The brother also developed neck and joint pain on the day following the sister's onset. Subsequently, his erythematous lesions spread over his whole body. Chikungunya virus was detected from the sister's blood and urine by specific reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, but not in the brother's samples. Retrospectively, his history of chikungunya fever was confirmed by the presence of the anti-chikungunya virus immunoglobulin (Ig)M and IgG antibodies using the specific enzyme-linked immunoassay. In Japan, no autochthonous case of Chikungunya fever was reported previously. We should give attention to the imported infectious diseases for epidemic prevention. This report warns about the danger of the imported infectious diseases, and also suggests that covering the topic of infectious disease in the world is critical to doctors as well as travelers.--Communicated by:Roland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[This is another example of the need to take a complete travel history and have good laboratory support to arrive at an accurate diagnosis.  Although no ongoing transmission occurred at this time, Japan has had local transmission of dengue virus in the past, indicating that a vector mosquito that is also competent for chikungunya virus transmission is present there.A map showing the location of the Cook Islands in the South Pacific can be accessed at <http://www.worldatlas.com/webimage/countrys/oceania/ck.htm and Japan at http://www.worldatlas.com/webimage/countrys/asia/jp.htm>. - Mod.TY]******[3] Virus evolutionDate: Mon 25 Jan 2016Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004402 [edited] <http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0004402>Whole-genome sequencing analysis from the chikungunya virus Caribbean outbreak reveals novel evolutionary genomic elements.Kenneth A. Stapleford et al. (2016)BackgroundChikungunya virus (CHIKV), an alphavirus and member of the Togaviridae family, is capable of causing severe febrile disease in humans. In December of 2013 the Asian Lineage of CHIKV spread from the Old World to the Americas, spreading rapidly throughout the New World. Given this new emergence in naÌøve populations we studied the viral genetic diversity present in infected individuals to understand how CHIKV may have evolved during this continuing outbreak.Methodology/Principle FindingsWe used deep-sequencing technologies coupled with well-established bioinformatics pipelines to characterize the minority variants and diversity present in CHIKV infected individuals from Guadeloupe and Martinique, 2 islands in the center of the epidemic. We observed changes in the consensus sequence as well as a diverse range of minority variants present at various levels in the population. Furthermore, we found that overall diversity was dramatically reduced after single passages in cell lines. Finally, we constructed an infectious clone from this outbreak and identified a novel 3' untranslated region (UTR) structure, not previously found in nature, that led to increased replication in insect cells.Conclusions/SignificanceHere we [performed] an intrahost quasispecies analysis of the new CHIKV outbreak in the Caribbean. We identified novel variants present in infected individuals, as well as a new 3'UTR structure, suggesting that CHIKV has rapidly evolved in a short period of time once it entered this naÌøve population. These studies highlight the need to continue viral diversity surveillance over time as this epidemic evolves in order to understand the evolutionary potential of CHIKV.Author SummaryChikungunya virus is a re-emerging and rapidly spreading arbovirus that has caused several outbreaks in the last decade with the most recent in the Caribbean islands and the Americas beginning in 2013 infecting over 1 million individuals. The ability to monitor such epidemics would be enhanced by characterizing the viral populations that circulate within infected individuals. To do this, we deep-sequenced viral populations from infected individuals and identified minority variants present at high frequencies, as well as the presence of a novel 3' untranslated genome region (UTR) structure, a key determinant of chikungunya virus infectivity and evolution never before described in nature. Finally, we genetically engineered an infectious clone from this outbreak strain and established that the novel 3'UTR structure increases viral replication in mosquito cells. Taken together these studies highlight the vast diversity of viral populations in infected individuals, reveal potential novel determinants of chikungunya virus biology, and provide an indispensable tool for future studies involved in viral evolution and adaptation.Figures [see source]--Communicated by:Roland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[Because CHIKV is almost certain to become endemic in the Americas, prospective studies such as this, carried out periodically over time, would provide an interesting assessment of changes in the virus genome. It would also be interesting to determine any changes in the ability of CHIKV to infect and be transmitted by _Aedes aegypti_ from localities where the virus persists.Is CHIK virus transmission declining in the Americas, or has the attention of the medical community become very distracted by the Zika vius outbreak? Perhaps some of both. Cooler weather in the north temperate zone has probably slowed or stopped transmission for now.  Surveillance and laboratory support in tropical and subtropical areas is doubtless overwhelmed by the Zika outbreak. - Mod.TY]
