<http://www.voacambodia.com/content/cambodia-struggling-to-stem-the-spread-of-drug-resistant-malaria/3176593.html>The WHO has adopted a policy to eliminate malaria entirely from the countries in the Greater Mekong sub-region by 2030 and has pledged USD 3 billion for Cambodia.Malaria infections in Cambodia and the Greater Mekong sub-region fell overall in 2015, according to health officials. But the continuing spread of drug-resistant parasites that cause the disease remains a major concern for local and international health authorities.Statistics from last year [2015] show how successes in battling malaria in Cambodia are being undermined by a continued failure to contain resistance to the drug artemisinin, which was once considered an anti-malaria wonder drug. Resistance to the drug was first discovered in western Cambodia in the former Khmer Rouge territory of Pailin in 2006.Huy Rekol, director at the Ministry of Health's National Center for Malaria Control, told VOA Khmer that Cambodia recorded 51 200 cases of malaria last year [2015], which represents a 9 percent drop in the previous year. He said just 10 people died from the disease in the year, compared with 18 deaths in 2014.However, drug resistance has now expanded into provinces in the north and northeast of the country, he said, explaining that artemisinin-resistant forms of a malaria-causing parasite had now been found in Stung Treng, Ratanakkiri, and Mondulkiri provinces. ""Based on our studies from 2013, we found that the drug resistance was occurring only in six provinces. But now it's expanded to another three provinces, so it's totally in nine provinces now,"" Huy Rekol said.The migration of people around the country for work was spreading drug resistance, which develops when patients infected with malaria-causing parasites are given incorrect doses or do not complete their course of anti-malarial drugs, he said.A World Health Organization (WHO) update published in September [2015] noted that a combination of artemisinin and a partner drug was being used successfully to cure patients in the region found to have drug-resistant forms of the malaria-causing parasite _Plasmodium falciparum_. But this approach, known as artemisinin-based combination therapy [ACT], has started to fail in Cambodia.Scientists believe mutations are taking place within a protein known as Kelch 13, or K13, and that those mutations are getting faster. Therefore, the Cambodian government and its partners must shuffle between different combinations of drugs every five years, Huy Rekol said. ""Now, the development of the parasite is very fast,"" Huy Rekol said. ""This means, we should be more careful, as the parasite is developing very fast if we keep using the same medicine for more than 5 years.""As an example of how resistance can make a drug useless within just a few years, Siv Sovannaroth, technical bureau chief at the National Center for Malaria Control, said that combination drugs used since 2008 were now increasingly failing.A combination using the drug DHA Piperaquine was initially only failing to cure malaria in 10 percent of cases, he said. Since late 2014, however, it has been failing in 30 percent of cases.Another drug, artesunate mefloquine -- previously used from 2008 in combination with artemisinin -- was reintroduced in late 2015, but only after delays caused by paperwork and slow ordering, Siv Sovannaroth said.The failure to stop the spread of drug resistance in Cambodia is a global concern, with experts warning of a major disaster if mutations spread to sub-Saharan Africa, where malaria can be fatal in about 90 percent of cases. But simply reshuffling the drugs may never completely contain the problem, Siv Sovannaroth said.""The general assumption nowadays is that containment of the artemisinin resistance is impossible, because resistance not only spreads, but also emerges on its own [through mutations],"" he said. ""Therefore, the only way to eliminate drug resistance is to eliminate malaria.""The WHO has adopted a policy to eliminate malaria entirely from the countries in the Greater Mekong sub-region by 2030, and has pledged USD 3 billion for Cambodia, Thailand, and Laos to that end.The Cambodian government itself launched a 5-year action plan on malaria last week, announcing that it would spend about USD 142 million.Huy Rekol said his department was seeking for its work half of the entire budget of the action plan, which is part of a 25-year plan signed by Prime Minister Hun Sen in 2011. ""First, we focus on the medical diagnosis and curing malaria. Secondly, prevention of spreading agents by using mosquito nets or preventing the infection from one mosquito to another,"" he said, adding that the government was also working to eradicate counterfeit anti-malaria drugs, improve its monitoring systems and educate local communities about malaria.[Byline: Neou Vannarin]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The medium term goal (by 2020) of the Cambodia Elimination Action Framework 2015-2019 are to move towards elimination of malaria across Cambodia with an initial focus on _Plasmodium falciparum_ malaria and ensure zero death from malaria and the 5 main objectives are:- to ensure universal access to early malaria diagnosis and treatment services with an emphasis on detection of all malaria cases (including among mobile/migrant populations) and ensure effective treatment including clearance of _P. falciparum_ gametocytes and dormant liver stage of _P. vivax_;- to halt drug pressure for selection of artemisinin resistant malaria parasites by improving access to appropriate treatment and preventing use of monotherapies and substandard drugs in both public and private sector;- to ensure universal access to preventive measures and specifically prevent transmission of artemisinin resistant malaria parasites among target populations (including mobile/migrant populations) by mosquito control, personal protection and environmental manipulation;- to ensure universal community awareness and behaviour change among the population at risk and support the containment of artemisinin resistant parasites and eliminate all forms of malaria through comprehensive behaviour change communication (BCC), community mobilization and advocacy; and-to provide effective management (including information systems and surveillance) and coordination to enable rapid and high quality implementation of the elimination strategy. - Mod.STProMED-mail has commented extensively on the development of decreased susceptibility to artemisinin in the border areas between Thailand and Myanmar, Thailand and Cambodia, and in Cambodia. The reasons for the decreasing susceptibility are several, but the use of underdosing (few tablets, not the entire course) and counterfeit drugs are probably the most important driving forces. Resistance to chloroquine, pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine (Fansidar), and mefloquine developed in the same geographical areas, and probably again due to the same driving forces: underdosing and counterfeit drugs.A recent paper by Griffin JT et al (Potential for reduction of burden and local elimination of malaria by reducing _Plasmodium falciparum_ malaria transmission: a mathematical modelling study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016. pii: S1473-3099(15) 00423-5. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00423-5 [Epub ahead of print]; <http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(15)00423-5/fulltext>) argue that many malaria deaths can be prevented by increasing coverage of control measures to 80 percent would result in a reduction in case incidence of 21 percent and a reduction in mortality rates of 40 percent.A comment on the paper by Professor Brain Greenwood (How much more malaria could be prevented? Lancet Infect. Dis. 2016. pii: S1473-3099(15)00482-X. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00482-X. [Epub ahead of print]; <http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(15)00482-X/fulltext>) stress the increasing cost associated with increasing coverage of the proportion of a population not covered.ProMED-mail have previously argued that probably the best strategy to ensure full doses and spoil the trade in counterfeit drugs is to provide anti-malarials free of charge and in full doses to patients in Cambodia, just as free anti-retroviral drugs are provided. The USD 3 billion pledged from the WHO would go a long way to accomplish this.Including a single dose of primaquine in the treatment would also reduce transmission of potential resistant strains, as advocated by the WHO for low endemic countries (<http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/who_htm_gmp_2015.1.pdf>). - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/145>.]
