UN News Centre [edited]<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53174#.VrpMfTaRbdk>After the identification of 4 cases of Lassa fever in Benin, the government, backed by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), has immediately launched a response against the epidemic, the agencies announced today [5 Feb 2016].To date, there have been 25 suspected cases, among which 12 deaths have been identified. Among the deceased, 4 cases of Lassa fever have been confirmed as positive, and 2 persons who contracted the virus are currently under treatment in quarantine isolation centres, the agencies said in a joint press release.During a press statement held on 23 Jan 2016, the national authorities indicated that after the confirmation of the proven case of Lassa fever at the St. Martin Zone Hospital of Papane, in the northern district of Tchaourou, a national technical team was immediately dispatched to the spot.Following the death of a pregnant woman on 5 Jan [2016] at the same hospital, 6 health workers -- 3 nurses, a female laboratory technician and 2 nursing auxiliaries -- developed clinical symptoms of Lassa fever. On 21 Jan [2016], a male nurse, among the suspected cases, died at the Borgou Departmental Hospital of Parakou, located in the central Benin.In light of all this, the national authorities supported by WHO and UNICEF and humanitarian partners have set up a response strategy to the epidemic that includes setting up: quarantine units in affected areas to separate suspected cases from others patients and limit the risks of exposure to people; and a tracing system to follow the contact cases in the affected zone. To date, 203 contact cases are spread across 6 communes: Tchaourou, Ouesse, Kalale, Bembereke, Parakou, and Porto-Novo.Among other actions, almost 200 community health workers are monitoring the contact cases across the country; supplies of medical stocks (Ribavirin) have been prepositioned in Cotonou and in affected areas; protection kits including personal protection equipment (PPE) for health professional staff, soap, tarpaulins, gloves, boots, glasses and masks, decontamination products, infrared thermometers, and water treatment units have been put at the ready; and the health staff of the affected areas have been trained in the use of protective equipment, on medical protocols, and on the identification and active search of suspected contact cases.Further, the agencies noted that sensitization sessions are being organized for the population, and awareness raising communications are being broadcast through local and national media including radio stations, press and TV, as a well as online platforms.According to WHO, Lassa fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic illness caused by Lassa virus, a member of the arenavirus family of viruses. It is transmitted to humans from contact with food or household items contaminated with rodent faeces. The disease is endemic in the rodent population in parts of West Africa. The virus can also be transmitted through contact with an infected person via biological liquids: blood, urine, saliva, sperm, vomit, faeces. The incubation period of the virus is 6- 21 days.The 1st symptoms of the disease are fever, physical fatigue, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headaches, abdominal pains, sore throat. Neck or facial swelling can sometimes be observed. Ribavirin is an efficient treatment to fight the Lassa fever. This drug can treat infected people if it is administered as soon as the 1st signs appear.The agencies recommend the following measures to enhance prevention: from the very 1st signs, it is imperative to immediately go to the nearest health centre; wash hands regularly with water and soap; ensure an adequate protection of food stocks and leftovers at home; avoid the manipulation and consumption of rats; avoid contact with any person suspected or confirmed with the Lassa fever; stay away from faeces, urine, saliva, vomit and contaminated objects of a person suspected, confirmed or declared dead of Lassa fever; do not touch the body of a person suspected of having died from the Lassa fever, even during funerary ceremonies.Benin was hit by a Lassa fever outbreak between October 2014 and January 2015. At that time, 16 cases were registered, and 9 people died. Among the casualties, 2 were confirmed to be from Lassa fever. Relevant authorities declared the end of the epidemic per international sanitary regulations, which recommend the observance of 2 periods of 21 days during which no new case is registered.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[In Benin, the number of suspected cases is from 20 to 25 and deaths from 9 to 12, with 4 confirmed cases since 3 Feb 2016 (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20160206.3999178). It is tragic that 6 health care workers in the hospital were infected. The response strategy set up by the national authorities supported by WHO and UNICEF and humanitarian partners should prevent similar exposures as well as track down any cases involving people exposed to infected individuals. Since the virus is endemic in Benin and cases have occurred there in previous years, one hopes that the response strategy will continue on into the future, when new cases will doubtless appear, after the current outbreak has ended.The virus is a member of the family _Arenaviridae_ and causes acute hemorrhagic fever. It is transmitted to humans from contact with food or household items contaminated with excreta of multimammate rats (_Mastomys_ spp). Public education is an important measure to prevent infections in the home. Virus transmission can occur in houses or in hospital environments or laboratories in the absence of adequate infection control measures.Images of _Mastomys_ mice can be seen at <http://www.ispot.org.za/node/255877>.Maps of Benin can be accessed at <http://www.geoatlas.com/medias/maps/countries/benin/beu51k8n/benin_pol.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/22157>. - Mod.TY]
