Science [excerpted, edited]<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/02/zika-s-long-strange-trip-limelight?utm_campaign=email-news-latest&et_rid=17103660&et_cid=263974>On 18 Apr 1947, a rhesus monkey that researchers identified as 766 ran a fever of 39.7 C [103.5 F], about 2 C higher than normal. The monkey was part of a study hunting for yellow fever virus and was living in a cage on a platform built into the tree canopy in the 1.5-km-long [0.9 mile] Zika Forest, which runs adjacent to an arm of Lake Victoria in Uganda. Then, 3 days later, the investigators took a blood sample from Rhesus 766 and injected it into the brains of Swiss albino mice. The mice ""showed signs of sickness"" after 10 days, and the researchers harvested their brains, from which they isolated a ""filterable transmissible agent.""Come January of the following year [1948], the same researchers trapped mosquitoes from these canopy platforms and took their bounty back to the lab, hoping to isolate yellow fever virus. Others had shown that one of these species they caught, _Aedes africanus_, shuttled the yellow fever virus, so the investigators put 86 of the insects in a refrigerator to ""render them inactive"" and then ground them up in a blood-saline solution, which they again injected into the brains of mice. The animals ""appeared inactive"" after 7 days, and tests showed they harbored the same transmissible agent that had sickened Rhesus 766. The researchers called their ""hitherto unrecorded virus"" Zika.For nearly 7 decades, the Zika virus would remain a virological curiosity, receiving little more attention than other obscure members of the Flaviviridae family that are transmitted by mosquitoes, such as Spondweni, Wesselsbron, and Ntaya. But now that it appears as though Zika might be causing serious harm to babies in Brazil, the World Health Organization has deemed it a ""public health emergency of international concern."" It's fast earning the reputation of the scariest virus on the planet. And the recent explosive spread of Zika around Latin America and the Caribbean serves notice, yet again, that remote places are no longer as remote as they used to be, so expect ever more exotic pathogens lurking in nature to become commonplace.The Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe, located 11 km [7 miles] northeast of the Zika Forest, just after the end of World War II carried out the meticulous work that isolated the pathogen du jour [the details are provided in the full article] and published the results in the Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, which would publish 10 of the 24 total Zika studies that appeared in the scientific literature over the next 30 years.[Information about human infections and virus transmission by _Aedes aegypti_ are described. - Mod.TY]Loads of countries began reporting evidence of Zika antibodies in humans and wild monkeys in the 1970s and 80s, but documented cases of people with disease remained scarce, with scattered reports of human Zika virus infections trickling in from Nigeria and Indonesia. Then nothing until 2007, when physicians on Yap Island in the Federated Republic of Micronesia noticed an outbreak of a disease that resembled mild cases of dengue but was distinct, in part because people had a rash. A report of this outbreak in 2009 for the 1st time earned Zika a slot in a high-profile publication, The New England Journal of Medicine. As the authors noted, ""No outbreaks and only 14 cases of human Zika virus disease have been previously documented."" The paper documented 49 confirmed and 59 probable Zika cases.Odd case reports soon followed. Two U.S. scientists diagnosed in Colorado were apparently infected in Senegal, and one of them infected his wife, presumably through sex, when he returned home; they only thought to test for Zika because of a chance meeting with a grandson of Alexander Haddow, one of the researchers who discovered the virus. A U.S. Navy research station in Cambodia detected a case in a 3-year-old boy. A 52-year-old woman in Australia was diagnosed after returning home from a holiday in Indonesia. Then in 2013, an outbreak walloped French Polynesia, with 333 confirmed cases and an estimated 19 000 suspected others. For the 1st time, the disease was associated with serious symptoms: mainly neurological disorders, including Guillain-Barre syndrome, which sometimes causes a temporary paralysis, and, in rare instances, is deadly. Also, 2 babies also were infected in utero or during delivery, but neither had lasting health problems.Cases of traveler-associated Zika began to mount: A Norwegian who vacationed in Tahiti, a Canadian who went to Thailand, Japanese tourists who visited Bora Bora, an Australian who explored the Cook Islands, a German who returned from Malaysian Borneo.The 1st published report of ""autochthonous"" cases in Brazil -- meaning they were not imported -- appeared in June 2015. ... A few months later, Brazilian clinicians started reporting an unusually high number of babies born with small heads, a telltale sign of microcephaly. The rest is history [that is still ongoing].[Byline: Jon Cohen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The full article provides additional fascinating details about the early work with Zika virus, along with photographs. Subscribers are encouraged to read the complete report. - Mod.TY]******[2] Current concernsDate: Mon 8 Feb 2016From: Ronald St. John <ronaldstjohn@gmail.com> [edited]It is self-evident that we live in an age of instant communication thanks to the Internet. But instant communication through web sites, Facebook, Twitter, etc. can be a double-edged sword, and the media frenzy over Zika is a case in point.Today (6 Feb 2016), we counted 89 Zika postings on HealthMap, many of which report some ""facts"" but no context, i.e. any estimate of the risk. The current media frenzy to be the 1st to publish the latest incidental finding about the Zika virus has both positive and negative effects. On the positive side, the monitoring of a fast-moving event is a benefit for researchers and policy makers. On the negative side, the reported events are often lacking in context. For example, is it really surprising to find virus in saliva and urine, but what is the risk of transmission by this route? How many people are likely to have broken skin in contact with the saliva or urine of an infected person? Is virus in saliva a risk for kissing?Since so many infected people are asymptomatic and unaware of their infection, is it surprising to document transmission by blood transfusion? There have been a few [3] documented instances of sexual transmission of this virus, but what is the risk? It is our understanding that viral loads in semen are too low to be infectious, but we have not seen this mentioned in any sensational news article about this ""new"" sexually transmitted infection.And then there is microcephaly. Evidence for a causal association is growing, but solid epidemiological studies have not yet nailed it down. Experts in Brazil have begun a critical review of reported cases. All babies with a head circumference of less than 32 cm are flagged as a suspected case, regardless of the potential cause. Of the 1313 cases the government has investigated so far, only around a 3rd, or 404, were confirmed to have microcephaly. The diagnosis was rejected in the remaining cases.Although Brazilian experts are addressing the issue of over-diagnosis, the increases in this condition still require explanation. Still, the question of why [only in] Brazil persists. In Colombia, where there are at least 20 000 known cases -- and at least 80 000 more [infections] -- since 80 percent of infected people have no symptoms, why are there no reports of microcephaly? Is/are some other factor(s) present that may be present in Brazil absent elsewhere? Defining the real risk for this condition will depend on solid epidemiological study design and good science. This takes time.However, time appears to be a luxury in our instant communication world. There is a rush to be the 1st to report the latest finding. Although Zika was being transmitted in Brazil for some time (late 2014, early 2015?), the media frenzy began in earnest with the microcephaly issue. The downside is the challenge faced by policy makers who have to respond to incomplete information with lack of solid scientific evidence. Media pressure forces bad policy that is not science-based. The knee-jerk reaction (e.g., El Salvador asks women to postpone pregnancy for 2 years, really?), and the spillover of fear to travellers will adversely affect income in countries depending on tourism.And, as more and more countries start to test for Zika, they will find it is already there. For the media, it would seem to be a startling finding. But, if this virus is already widespread globally, wherever the mosquito vector occurs, can it really be a Public Health Event of International Concern (PHEIC)? Early genomic analyses of the Americas virus point to an origin from the Pacific region. If it has mutated in ways to increase its virulence, then it would be another matter and properly considered as a PHEIC.Precautionary advice when the science is incomplete is a must (e.g., CDC's recommendations for pregnant women), but another precaution to be emphasized in the media is not to jump too soon to conclusions without facts.On a more positive note, in the course of time, and with widespread asymptomatic infections, a country's population will build up sufficient herd immunity to block further spread in it. This likely outcome is not mentioned in any media report. Herd immunity may be little help for pregnant women today, but there is hope for the future that the risk to pregnancy could decline in less than 2 years.--Ronald St. John, MD, MPHFormer Director GeneralCentre for Emergency Preparedness and ResponsePublic Health Agency of Canada<ronaldstjohn@gmail.com>andJack Woodall, PhDCo-founder & Associate Editor, ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The authors concerns reflect questions that many of our ProMED-mail moderators have had during the course of the Zika virus outbreak, and have been reflected in moderator comments.Dealing with the popular press and with lay politicians is frequently a challenge. They want simple answers and unequivocal statements. In a rapidly changing situation, often (usually) that is not possible. Some of the points raised are beginning to be addressed, but studies are not completed yet. Other points will doubtless be addressed in the future. That makes interacting with the media and some policy makers difficult, because they want firm answers now. - Mod.TY]******[3] Now and the futureDate: On line as of 4 Feb 2016Source: International Journal of Infectious Diseases DOI: <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2016.02.001> [excerpted, edited]<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1201971216000217>Eskild Petersen, Mary E. Wilson, Sok Touch, Brian McCloskey, Peter Mwaba, Matthew Bates, Osman Dar, Frank Mattes, Mike Kidd, Giuseppe Ippolito, Esam I. Azhar, Alimuddin Zumla. Unexpected and Rapid Spread of Zika Virus in The Americas - Implications for Public Health Preparedness for Mass Gatherings at the 2016 Brazil Olympic Games.SummaryMass gatherings at major international sporting events put millions of international travelers and local host-country residents at risk of acquiring infectious diseases, including locally endemic infectious diseases. The mosquito-borne Zika virus (ZIKV) has recently aroused global attention due to its rapid spread since its 1st detection in May 2015 in Brazil to 22 other countries and other territories in the Americas. The ZIKV outbreak in Brazil, has also been associated with a significant rise in the number of babies born with microcephaly and neurological disorders and has been declared a Global Emergency by the World Health Organization. This explosive spread of ZIKV in Brazil poses challenges for public health preparedness and surveillance for the Olympics and Paralympics, which are due to be held in Rio De Janeiro in August 2016. We review the epidemiology and clinical features of the current ZIKV outbreak in Brazil, highlight knowledge gaps, and review the public health implications of the current ZIKV outbreak in the Americas. We highlight the urgent need for a coordinated collaborative response for prevention and spread of infectious diseases with epidemic potential at mass gatherings events.Gaps in knowledgeIt is not clear what the factors are underlying the rapidity and intensity of ongoing ZIKV outbreak in Brazil. Furthermore, the association of ZIKV with microcephaly and neurological disorders requires further study. One hypothesis is that the ZIKV has undergone recombination in nature and that a loss of the N154 glycosylation site in the envelope protein is a possible adaptive response to _Aedes dalziel_, a zoophilic vector in Africa.It is also possible that the link between sporadic cases of microcephaly in Zika endemic areas were being missed due to low numbers and poor surveillance mechanisms. Thus, it was only when the massive outbreak occurred in Brazil, which has a good live birth surveillance system, that the link between ZIKV and microcephaly was recognized.Protecting the health of attendees of the 2016 OlympicsGiven the increase of congenital anomalies, Guillain-Barre syndrome, other neurological and autoimmune syndromes associated with ZIKV, the WHO recommends that all Member States establish and maintain heightened awareness and capacity to detect and confirm ZIKV cases, have healthcare facilities prepared to respond to a possible increased demand for specialized care for microcephaly and neurological syndromes, strengthen antenatal care, and introduce public health measures to reduce risk of ZIKV spread and infection.Reducing risk of acquiring ZIKVSeveral recommendations are available for reducing risk of acquiring ZIKV. Measures to avoid mosquito bites include wearing long sleeved shirts, use of insect repellant and staying in screened or air-conditioned accommodations. US-CDC and ECDC recommend that any travelers who are pregnant (any stage/trimester) or planning to become pregnant should avoid travelling to areas with ZIKV outbreaks. If travel cannot be avoided or postponed, or if people live in areas where ZIKV transmission is known to occur, scrupulous measures to avoid mosquito bites during both daytime and nighttime hours must be taken. Pregnant women in Zika-affected areas should wear protective clothing, apply a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-approved insect repellent, and sleep in a screened room or under a mosquito net. Aedes spp mosquitoes predominantly bite during the day, especially around dawn and dusk, and thus the correct timing and use of mosquito repellents and other personal protection measures are key to preventing any vector-borne infection.ConclusionsZIKV has been present for many decades in Africa and Asia; since 2007, it has caused major outbreaks in Micronesia, French Polynesia, and recently reached Brazil in 2015. In the Americas, ZIKV is spreading and is a potential threat to the attendees of the 2016 Rio Olympics. A previously unreported linkage has been identified in Brazil, that of microcephaly in babies and other neurological disorders leading to the WHO declaring ZIKV a Global emergency. Molecular analyses of ZIKV are urgently needed to understand whether a change in the virus can explain the rapid spread and the serious consequences of infection. In the absence of a ZIKV vaccine, control efforts so far rest entirely on mosquito vector control both at community and household levels and prevention of mosquito bites by individuals. Strategies for preventing spread by blood transfusions, via sexual contact (if confirmed), other tissue and organ transplantation are required. Travel restrictions to ZIKV endemic areas for pregnant women, and postponing pregnancy for women living in areas experiencing ZIKV outbreaks have been recommended. The development and availability of specific and rapid diagnostic tests for ZIKV will allow enhanced surveillance and assessing level of risk for microcephaly, Guillain-Barre, and other complications. There is no specific treatment or vaccine available. Research into rapid diagnostics, treatments and vaccine are underway. The emergence of ZIKV soon after the Ebola outbreak is yet another reminder of the urgent need for a coordinated global effort to have sufficiently resourced Rapid Response Groups for proactive surveillance and conducting priority research in emergency situations.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report contains additional valuable information, and interested subscribers are encouraged to read the entire article. - Mod.TY]
