Food Safety News [edited]<http://www.foodsafetynews.com/2016/02/123594/>State officials added 2 more people to the list of patients in an _E. coli_ outbreak in California linked to raw milk from Organic Pastures Dairy Co., but the dairy operator says the state's data is ""garbage.""Of the 8 people confirmed with the ""unique strain of Shiga-toxin producing _E. coli_ O157,"" 2 developed hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), a spokesman for the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) said Thursday, 11 Feb 2016. 7 of those sickened in the outbreak are children. None of the patients' names or hometowns have been released by the state. 5 of the 8 patients drank Organic Pastures unpasteurized raw milk before becoming ill, according to California health officials.""All 8 illnesses occurred in January 2016. The investigation is ongoing,"" the CDPH spokesman said.Mark McAfee, the founder and CEO of Fresno [California]-based Organic Pastures Dairy Co., said Friday, 12 Feb 2016, via e-mail that ""the CDPH list is garbage and not accurate."" ""That list of 8 includes misc (sic) unsubstantiated consumers that reach back to October [2015],"" McAfee said. ""(It) includes my grandson (name withheld by Food Safety News) who was never sickened with ecoli (sic). He had some diarrhea and was tested. His stool had shigatoxin (sic) from Shigella (sic) and not e coli (sic). Nothing has changed. The Fresno patient never developed HUS. I know because I spoke with the family and are very close with them.""California health officials confirmed on Friday, 12 Feb 2016, that the January 2016 outbreak includes 8 patients and that 2 of them developed HUS.The hemolytic-uremic syndrome occurs in 5 percent to 10 percent of people diagnosed with Shiga toxin-producing _E. coli_ (STEC) infections [also called enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ (EHEC) - Mod.LL], according to the CDC. It is potentially life-threatening and some patients suffer permanent kidney damage.""The state data is bad information. This is a story that has no legs. There is nothing to update,"" McAfee said Friday, 12 Feb 2016. ""Everyone is home and no HUS in spite of what the state says on their now very old and inaccurate list. ... I spoke with the families and I have direct information.""Earlier this week McAfee said if only some of the patients reported drinking Organic Pastures Dairy Co. raw milk, the state should be looking for something else common to all of the patients. On Friday, 12 Feb 2016, the CDPH reported 1 of the 2 new patients added to the outbreak list had consumed Organic Pastures whole raw milk before becoming ill. The department did not yet have complete information on the other additional patient.Sometimes patients who drink raw milk are not forthcoming with the source of their illnesses and parents may not know what their children consume while visiting friends or relatives.McAfee has said he and other officials with Organic Pastures are in contact with state officials and cooperating with the investigation into the outbreak. The 500-cow commercial dairy posted a recall 4 Feb 2016 on its Facebook page and company website for whole, raw milk that had expiration dates of 23 and 26 Jan 2016.[Byline: Coral Beach]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The following was extracted from Lutwick LI. Enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ infections. In: Confronting emerging zoonoses: the One Health paradigm. Yamada A, Kahn LH, Kaplan B, Monath TP, Woodall J, Conti LA (editors). Tokyo, Japan: Springer, (in press). Risk factors for the subsequent development of HUS after EHEC include children less than 10 years of age, elevated white blood cell counts, persistent low platelet counts without reversal and the use of either antimicrobial agents or antimotility agents during the diarrhea stage before or after bloody diarrhea develops. Since fever is generally not part of the presentation but significant abdominal pain is, patients with diarrhea, significant abdominal pain and no fever should be considered to have EHEC infection, and antimicrobial or antimotility agents should be avoided. Additionally, certain strains -- for example, the so-called clade 8 and the chimeric organism _E. coli_ O104:H4 -- can be associated with a higher risk of HUS.HUS itself is a thrombotic illness primarily caused by the effects of the EHEC produced Shiga toxin acting on the vascular endometrium of organs where the toxin's receptors are expressed, particularly the kidney and brain. The syndrome consists of the combination of prominent low platelet counts (thrombocytopenia), intravascular red blood cell destruction (hemolysis) and diminished kidney function that can require hemodialysis. Neurological involvement occurs mostly in those who develop renal failure and the central nervous system involvement portends much higher mortality. Indeed, most of the acute mortality relates to neurological disease. Most patients will recover, but some, perhaps 10 percent, remain with renal failure and require chronic hemodialysis. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
