Borneo Post [edited]<http://www.theborneopost.com/2016/02/13/pollution-in-sungai-koyan-blamed-for-melioidosis-cases/>Pollution in Sungai Koyan has been blamed for allegedly infecting Baram Resettlement Scheme (BRS) residents with melioidosis, which is caused by the _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ bacterium.The disease is said to have claimed the life of a woman from Uma Juman in Sungai Asap [Sarawak state, Borneo] last week, just 2 months after her son is said to have also died from the same disease. On Wednesday, 10 Feb 2016, a Sungai Asap villager was admitted at a private hospital here and is said to be undergoing treatment for possible melioidosis.""Over the past decade, I have lost 4 family members to this disease,"" claimed Bakun Community Safety Committee chairman Dr Elli Luhat yesterday, 12 Feb 2016. According to Elli, the Ministry of Health needs to gauge the seriousness of the disease in the resettlement area with a proper tabulation of the number and topography of victims infected.Currently, BRS is home to around 20 000 residents who rely on Sungai Koyan for their daily water supply. Elli claimed if melioidosis is not contained in Sungai Asap, it could spread to the Batang Rajang where more lives could be threatened. He said the Bakun Community Safety Committee will provide its support and assistance to relevant agencies to contain the spread of the disease.""The villagers here have sacrificed their land to build the Bakun and Murum dams. It is only fair that all of them deserve to be given water which is safe for consumption and daily use without any lingering fear,"" he said. Elli added that each of the 14 longhouses in Uma Juman are linked with water pipes connected to a pumping station at Sungai Koyan.""However, the water is treated from a mechanical system which does not remove the hundreds or thousands of dangerous bacteria and minerals in it. A biological system should be put into place as a measure to immediately stop victims from making contact or consuming these dangerous bacteria,"" he claimed.Meanwhile, Assistant Minister for Public Health Datuk Dr Jerip Susil said the melioidosis cases at the Bakun resettlement is not an outbreak as claimed by Elli. Melioidosis in Sarawak, he explained, is actually categorised as an endemic disease with confirmed reports of sporadic cases. ""We cannot call it an outbreak because it involves only 1 or 2 cases and based on that it is an endemic,"" he added.Touching on the case in Sungai Asap, the area, he said, is experiencing new development projects and land cultivation projects. ""As construction gets underway, the organisms which carry the diseases are bound to resurface from the soil,"" he added. A press statement from the Health Department state director Datu Zulkifli Jantan, however, stated that to date, Sarawak had recorded only 1 confirmed case of the melioidosis disease affecting a victim in Sungai Asap, Bakun in 2016. Only 2 confirmed cases of the disease were reported in September and October 2015, which involved 1 death. The statement also said there had not been any unusual rise in the number of cases being recorded in Sungai Asap or any other parts of the state.In 2014, Sarawak recorded a total of 70 cases of melioidosis, which decreased to only 34 cases in 2015.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Melioidosis mainly affects people who have direct contact with contaminated soil and water. Many have an underlying predisposing condition such as diabetes (commonest risk factor), renal disease, cirrhosis, thalassemia, alcohol dependence, immunosuppressive therapy, chronic obstructive lung disease, cystic fibrosis, or excess kava consumption. (Kava is an herbal member of the pepper family that can be associated with chronic liver disease.) HIV infection, however, does not appear to be a major risk factor for more severe disease. Melioidosis may present at any age, but peaks in the 4th and 5th decades of life, affecting men more than women. In addition, although severe fulminating infection can and does occur in healthy individuals, severe disease and fatalities are much less common in those without risk factors.In acute severe melioidosis, there is characteristically a rapid progression of respiratory failure that is due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and/or pneumonia. It has been suggested that the ARDS to melioidosis sepsis is more rapid in progression than with other bacteria and may be related to the intracellular interactions of the bacillus and the leukocyte. Bacteremia without shock/hypotension has a substantially better prognosis.Derived from: Tolaney P, Lutwick LI. Melioidosis. In: Lutwick LI, Lutwick SM (eds). Bioterror: the weaponization of infectious diseases. Totowa NJ: Humana Press, 2008 pp 145-58.Sarawak is one of the 2 Malaysian states on the island of Borneo and can be seen on the map at: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sarawak#/media/File:Sarawak_in_Malaysia.svg>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/2565>.]
