CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65 (Early Release):1-2 [edited]<http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6506e1e>Martines RB, Bhatnagar J, Keating MK, et al. Notes from the field: evidence of Zika virus infection in brain and placental tissues from 2 congenitally infected newborns and 2 fetal losses -- Brazil, 2015.A surge in the number of children born with microcephaly was noted in regions of Brazil with a high prevalence of suspected Zika virus disease cases. More than 4700 suspected cases of microcephaly were reported from mid-2015 through January 2016, although additional investigations might eventually result in a revised lower number. In response, the Brazil Ministry of Health established a task force to further investigate possible connections between the virus and brain anomalies in infants.Since November 2015, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] has been developing assays for Zika virus testing in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples. In December 2015, FFPE tissues samples from 2 newborns (born at 36 and 38 weeks gestation) with microcephaly who died within 20 hours of birth and 2 miscarriages (fetal losses at 11 and 13 weeks) were submitted to CDC, from the state of Rio Grande do Norte in Brazil, for histopathologic evaluation and laboratory testing for suspected Zika virus infection. All 4 mothers had clinical signs of Zika virus infection, including fever and rash, during the 1st trimester of pregnancy, but did not have clinical signs of active infection at the time of delivery or miscarriage. The mothers were not tested for antibodies to Zika virus. Samples included brain and other autopsy tissues from the 2 newborns, a placenta from one of the newborns, and products of conception from the 2 miscarriages.FFPE tissues were tested by Zika virus reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) targeting the nonstructural protein 5 and envelope genes using general methods for RT-PCR and by immunohistochemistry using a mouse polyclonal anti-Zika virus antibody, using methods previously described. Specific specimens from all 4 cases were positive by RT-PCR, and sequence analysis provided further evidence of Zika virus infection, revealing highest identities with Zika virus strains isolated from Brazil during 2015. In the newborns, only brain tissue was positive by RT-PCR assays. Specimens from 2 of the 4 cases were positive by immunohistochemistry: viral antigen was noted in mononuclear cells (presumed to be glial cells and neurons within the brain) of one newborn, and within the chorionic villi from one of the miscarriages. Testing for dengue virus was negative by RT-PCR in specimens from all cases.For both newborns, significant histopathologic changes were limited to the brain, and included parenchymal calcification, microglial nodules, gliosis, and cell degeneration and necrosis. Other autopsy tissues and placenta had no significant findings. Tests for toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and HIV were negative in the 2 mothers who experienced miscarriages. Placental tissue from one miscarriage showed heterogeneous chorionic villi with calcification, fibrosis, perivillous fibrin deposition, and patchy intervillositis and focal villitis, while tissue from the other miscarriage had sparsely sampled normal-appearing chorionic villi.This report describes evidence of a link between Zika virus infection and microcephaly and fetal demise through detection of viral RNA and antigens in brain tissues from infants with microcephaly and placental tissues from early miscarriages. Histopathologic findings indicate the presence of Zika virus in fetal tissues. These findings also suggest brain and early gestational placental tissue might be the preferred tissues for postmortem viral diagnosis. Nonfrozen, formalin-fixed specimens or FFPE blocks are the preferred sample type for histopathologic evaluation and immunohistochemistry, and RT-PCR can be performed on either fresh frozen or formalin-fixed specimens. To better understand the pathogenesis of Zika virus infection and associated congenital anomalies and fetal death, it is necessary to evaluate autopsy and placental tissues from additional cases, and to determine the effect of gestational age during maternal illness on fetal outcomes.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Brazil microcephaly studyDate: Thu 4 Feb 2016Source: Bull World Health Organ E-pub [edited]<http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.16.170639>Soares de Araujo JS, Regis CT, Gomes RGS, Tavares TR, Rocha dos Santos C, Assuncao PM, et al. Microcephaly in northeast Brazil: a review of 16 208 births between 2012 and 2015.""AbstractA recent outbreak of microcephaly has been reported from Northeast Brazil. Neither its aetiology, nor its clinical significance has yet been fully established. A complication from an intrauterine infection with the Zika virus (ZIKV) is, thus far, the most explored hypothesis. In Paraiba, one of the 9 states within the epicentre of the epidemic, 21 medical centres collaborate, via telemedicine since 2012, in a paediatric cardiology network. The network's database currently stores information on more than 100 000 neonates. To support the microcephaly research, from 1-31 Dec 2015, the network ran a task force and rescued the head circumference from 16 208 neonates. A much higher than expected incidence of microcephaly was observed, varying from 2 per cent to 8 per cent according to the utilized classification criteria. These findings raise questions about the condition's diagnosis and its notification. An observed presentation's seasonality might reflect that of infections carried on by the _Aedes aegypti_ vector. However, the temporal fluctuation was documented since late 2012, before the allegedly entry of the ZIKV in Brazil in mid-2014. Further questions are raised on both the epidemiological surveillance of the _Aedes aegypti_ [transmitted] infections, as well as on different aetiological possibilities for the outbreak. At this stage, follow-up studies in the children diagnosed with microcephaly are mandatory prior to concluding what problem we are facing; how it came about and which consequences it may, or not, bring to the Brazilian population in years to come.""DiscussionIn 2000, SINASC (Brazilian Live Birth Information System) reported that the prevalence of microcephaly in Brazilian newborns was 5.5 cases/ 100 000 live births and in 2010 it was 5.7 cases / 100 000 live births. Over the last 3 months it went up to 99.7 per 100 000 live births which corresponds to a 20-fold increase. In this study, independent of the classification criteria used, we demonstrated a much higher incidence of microcephaly between 2012 and 2015.""Projecting our findings to the total number of live births in Paraiba, in 2014 (n=58 147), the number of neonates born with microcephaly in that year would have been 4652 by the Health Ministry proposed criteria, 2442 by the Fenton curves and 2907 by the proportionality criteria. Neonates classified with microcephaly by all 3 criteria would have been 1105.""These observations highlight the need to review the situation carefully. Many questions need to be answered prior to concluding what problem we are facing, how it came about and which consequences it is likely to bring to the Brazilian population in years to come.""The 1st question to be addressed is the real incidence of microcephaly in northeast Brazil.""The discrepancy from the expected and found cases may reflect the condition's major sub-notification in the official sites in recent years coupled with an even greater epidemiological crisis than presumed or simply the need to revise the diagnostic criteria for the condition.""The numbers of very extreme cases of microcephaly, for instance, while significantly increasing over the last few months, are much smaller and until recently fell within the expected ranges for the worldwide reported incidence.""It is possible that a high incidence of milder forms microcephaly has been occurring well before the current outbreak, but that only those extreme cases, with classical phenotypes, were being notified.""And as the number of extreme cases increased over these past 3 or 4 months so did the awareness of health professionals who started to notify milder forms. What remains to be determined is the clinical significance of these milder forms, which account for the vast majority of the reported cases. Could a 31cm or 32cm OFC in a term neonate, for instance, be within normal limits for this particular population? Could ethnical or nutritional components explain these findings? Are we facing large numbers of a neurological disease or observing an anthropometric variation of normality? The microcephaly occurrence displays a temporal distribution. Infections caused [transmitted] by the _Aedes aegypti_, a proposed aetiology for the outbreak, also demonstrate temporal fluctuations.""Currently, the association with the ZIKV infection is the most explored possibility. Evidence of perinatal transmission of ZIKV together with its strong neurotropism and its documentation in amniotic fluid of foetuses with microcephaly are factors that favour this hypothesis. However, if the ZIKV were indeed introduced in Brazil at the World Cup in mid 2014, the outbreak of microcephaly would have preceded it. ZIKV has been identified in Africa over 50 years ago, and neither there nor in the outbreaks outside Africa, has such an association with microcephaly been reported. However, recently ZIKV has been associated to a number of conditions including Guillain-Barre syndrome during a recent outbreak of the infection in French Polynesia.""Many other potential factors need to be considered as the cause of the outbreak. Among them figures the possibility of boosting effects from associated infections, perhaps even viral infections, such as [dengue] DENV and [chikungunya] CHIKV, both carried by the same _Aedes aegypti_ vector. Also to be considered is teratogens exposure, such as vaccines or drugs used in early pregnancy. Further, malnutrition, which has previously been associated with microcephaly, could have an intensifying effect when coupled with other aetiological factors. Indeed, most of the reported cases have occurred in low-income families.""Thus far, controlling the _Aedes aegypti_ vector has been a major public health strategy, which is justified not only by its potential benefits in holding back the epidemic, which may or may not hold true, but for its numerous other benefits to the population.""--communicated by:John Cathey<jt.cathey@icloud.com>‰ÛÂ‰ÛÂ[Teratogenic effects from Zika virus infections and from other causes are not mutually exclusive possibilities, as the authors point out. Both additional retrospective studies, as well as prospective case-control ones, may help to clarify the microcephaly situation in Brazil. One hopes that similar studies will be carried out in other countries where Zika virus infections of pregnant women are occurring, so far without reported cases of microcephaly. Interested subscribers are encouraged to read the full article. - Mod.TY]
