PLoS (Public Library of Science) ONE [summ., edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0004445>ref: Anez G, Heisey DA, Chancey C, et al. Distribution of dengue virus types 1 and 4 in blood components from infected blood donors from Puerto Rico. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016; 10(2): e0004445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004445. eCollection 2016----------------------------------------------------------------------""Background-----------Dengue is a mosquitoborne viral disease caused by the 4 dengue viruses (DENV-1 to 4) that can also be transmitted by blood transfusion and organ transplantation. The distribution of DENV in the components of blood from infected donors is poorly understood.""Methods--------We used an in-house TaqMan qRT-PCR assay to test residual samples of plasma, cellular components of whole blood (CCWB), serum, and clot specimens from the same collection from blood donors who were DENV-RNA-reactive in a parallel blood safety study. To assess whether DENV RNA detected by TaqMan was associated with infectious virus, DENV infectivity in available samples was determined by culture in mosquito cells.""Results--------DENV RNA was detected by TaqMan in all tested blood components, albeit more consistently in the cellular components; 78.8 per cent of CCWB, 73.3 per cent of clots, 86.7 per cent of sera and 41.8 per cent of plasma samples. DENV-1 was detected in 48 plasma and 97 CCWB samples while DENV-4 was detected in 21 plasma and 31 CCWB samples. In mosquito cell cultures, 29/111 (26.1 per cent) plasma, and 32/97 (32.7 per cent) CCWB samples were infectious. A subset of samples from 29 donors was separately analyzed to compare DENV viral loads in the available blood components. DENV viral loads did not differ significantly between components and ranged from 3-8 log10 PCR-detectable units/ml.""Conclusions------------DENV was present in all tested components from most donors, and viral RNA was not preferentially distributed in any of the tested components. Infectious DENV was also present in similar proportions in cultured plasma, clot and CCWB samples, indicating that these components may serve as a resource when sample sizes are limited. However, these results suggest that the sensitivity of the nucleic acid tests (NAT) for these viruses would not be improved by testing whole blood or components other than plasma.""Author summary---------------Dengue is a febrile disease caused by the 4 dengue viruses (DENV-1 to 4) transmitted by mosquitoes from the genus _Aedes_ that can also be transmitted by blood transfusion and organ transplantation. DENV is present in the blood of infected individuals without symptoms, meaning that infected donors may pose a risk to the safety of the donor blood supply. Current methods for detecting transfusion-transmitted viruses by nucleic acid testing use plasma as the testing specimen, and the number of tests that can be performed without reducing availability of blood for transfusion is limited. To determine whether blood components other than plasma could be suitable for testing, we quantified and compared the concentrations of DENV RNA in the residual components of blood collected from subjects previously identified as infected in a parallel blood safety study. Additionally, when available, samples were also evaluated for infectivity in tissue culture. The results showed that DENV RNA and infectious virions were detected comparably in all blood components, suggesting that using alternate specimens may improve sample availability but may not improve testing sensitivity.""--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This information will be useful for blood and tissue banks in areas where dengue transmission occurs. - Mod.TY]
