Northern Star [edited]<http://www.northernstar.com.au/news/parents-babies-alert-contagious-parechovirus/2934129/>Parents of babies on alert for contagious parechovirus------------------------------------------------------Parents of newborn babies in Queensland are being urged to be on guard for a potentially fatal and highly contagious virus. Authorities say there have already been 55 cases of parechovirus in Queensland this year [2016], 90 per cent of them among children less than 3 months old. Infectious diseases expert Dr Theo Sloots said the very young were in the ""danger period"" to contract parechovirus.The virus 1st broke out in Brisbane last September [2015] and has spread to infants on the Gold Coast, Toowoomba and, last month [January 2016], in Townsville, Mackay and Bundaberg. The Toowoomba Chronicle told the story of how 2 babies had been impacted by the virus last month. Doctors are being especially warned to look out for the symptoms because they often don't recognise it as parechovirus.Parechovirus can [cause] mild respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms in babies but in newborn infants, can lead to serious complications such as hepatitis or encephalitis. In children under 3 months it can cause severe disease, involving the central nervous system with babies having to be put into intensive care.Other symptoms of parechovirus included high temperatures, diarrhoea, abnormally rapid breathing, severe irritability or appearing to be in pain, rashes or skin discolouration and jerking movements.The virus is spread via respiratory droplets, saliva and faeces. Experts are working on a vaccine.--communicated byProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Parechoviruses are part of the _Picornaviridae_ family. This virus family causes many important animal and human diseases -- over 100 enteroviruses from the group have been responsible for large outbreaks of hand, foot and mouth disease, the common cold and other respiratory tract infections, gastroenteritis, skin eruptions, meningitis or encephalitis, and polio.Human parechoviruses (HPeV) were 1st identified in 1956 and were previously known as echoviruses 22 and 23. They are part of the larger parechovirus genus of viruses. Some HPeV strains are associated with more severe infections such as encephalitis and flaccid paralysis.Human parechoviruses (HPeVs) usually cause no symptoms at all but when illness occurs it is most commonly a mild diarrheal illness or respiratory infection. Infection with some strains can, rarely, lead to more severe blood infection (sepsis) and neurological infection (meningitis or encephalitis), particularly among young children.Children under 3 months of age are most likely to develop severe disease -- and babies can become unwell very quickly -- but most recover after a few days with supportive treatment.The virus is usually spread from person to person through contact with respiratory droplets, saliva or faeces from an infected person. Anyone can get infected with parechovirus. Young babies appear to be at risk of more severe disease.There is no vaccine to protect you from parechovirus infection. Good hygiene is the best protection: wash hands with soap and water after going to the toilet, before eating, after wiping noses, and after changing nappies or soiled clothing. Ensure the mouth and nose are covered when coughing and sneezing. Wipe the nose and mouth with tissues, dispose of used tissues and then wash your hands.People who are unwell with colds, flu-like illness or gastro illness should stay away from small babies. If you are caring for a small baby and are unwell, wash your hands or use an alcohol-based hand rub before touching or feeding the baby.Partially excerpted from <http://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-parechovirus-27604>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/285>.]
