Naij.com [edited]<https://www.naij.com/733383-dozens-children-dropping-dead-mystery-disease-lagos.html>25 children die from mystery disease in Lagos---------------------------------------------More than 2 dozen children have died from a mystery disease in Lagos state. The local community in the affected area has never encountered anything like this outbreak before. Health workers have been dispatched to the scene and a containment operation is under way.Residents of Otodo-Gbame community in Ikate, Lekki, Lagos state, are battling to save their children from a mystery disease which has claimed the lives of 25 children in the area.Some medical professionals believe the disease to be measles as the affected children developed rashes and usually died 2 to 3 days afterwards. Some families, most of whom work as fishermen and fish merchants, lost 2-3 children each when the disease ravaged the area in January and the 1st week of February [2016]. Health workers from the Eti-Osa local government area visited the community last Wed [17 Feb 2016] and started an immunization programme for local children.[...]One mother, who lost three of her children to the disease, said that apart from the rashes on their bodies, they also vomited blood before they died. ""My children fell sick in the 1st week of February. The disease is ravaging our area, and we did not have anyone to run to,"" she said, and continued: ""My children were killed by the disease. They were vomiting blood. I did not know what name to call the disease.""Another woman, mother of 1 of the 2 children that died on Wed [17 Feb 2016], said her girl was ill for only 2 days. ""She was 2 years old. She died on Wednesday in the presence of the health workers. She was sick for only 2 days.Local residents in Otodo-Gbame remain terrified for their children. [One man reported:] ""In the night, she could not sleep. Some of the symptoms we saw were swollen private parts and high temperature. We call it Ina oru. In the afternoon, she would play, but in the evening, her body would become hot. I work as a fisherman, and I was born in this community. Nothing of such had happened in our area before now. A family lost up to 3 children to the disease. That is why we appeal to the state government to give us a hospital.""The Lagos health ministry said it had sent epidemiologists to the community to verify the outbreak. The ministry's spokesperson, Mrs Adeola Salako, said blood samples and other body fluids had been collected for examination. ""An epidemiological investigation, led by the state epidemiologists from the Ministry of Health, began on Wed 10 Feb 2016,"" she said. ""The investigation is meant to verify the assertions and the cause of deaths through laboratory investigation of water, throat swabs and blood samples of children with suspected cases and to proffer solutions. ""It is worthy of note that no further death has been recorded since then.""[byline: Andrew Sweeney]--communicated by:ProMED-mail and HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is not clear what is causing death in these children. The agent appears to be fast-acting with death in 2-3 days, hemorrhagic leading to rash and vomiting. Possible agents include Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, Rift Valley fever, among other vectorborne agents. The report states immunization of children, but it is not clear with what. Additional information would be appreciated. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/617>.].................................................sb/lk/je/sh"
