Associated Press [edited]<https://www.ksl.com/index.php?nid=157&sid=38571413&title=2-central-washington-deaths-likely-linked-to-botulism>Health officials say 2 deaths in Washington state in February 2016 appear to be linked to botulism, apparently from home-canned foods. The Grant County Health District said on Friday, 19 Feb 2016, that the cause of the deaths has not been confirmed. The victims were in their 80s and lived together, but health officials say the disease can affect people of any age.Botulism is a severe, muscle-paralyzing disease, caused by a toxin that's made from bacteria that occur naturally in soil. Home-canned foods may be contaminated without appearing abnormal. But possible signs of contamination are if the container is leaking or bulging, if it spurts liquid or foam when opened, or if food is discolored or smells bad.Health officials say steps to prevent contamination include following hygienic canning procedures and storing food at the correct temperature. Initial symptoms include nausea, blurred vision and difficulty swallowing.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED-mail awaits more definitve information regarding this report.Most USA botulism postings relate to the alert that a particular commercially prepared food was not adequately made, which would increase a risk of intoxication with _Clostridium botulinum_ toxin. In most of these, no clear evidence of botulism is found in the food product. When botulism does occur related to food, it is most likely to be home-prepared. It should be noted that in typical foodborne botulism, the toxin is preformed in the food when ingested rather than disease being produced with ingestion of spores. Infant botulism (and its very rare adult equivalent, adult intestinal toxemia botulism) are caused by ingestion of spores, which germinate, and toxin is formed _in situ_.Botulinum, the most toxic of known toxins, is produced by the Gram positive spore-forming anaerobic bacterium _Clostridium botulinum_, found in soil worldwide. Botulism is caused by the consumption of contaminated products containing spores. Spores produce toxin when they germinate in the product or in the digestive tract. Humans are most often intoxicated by consumption of the preformed toxin in such things as home-canned vegetables or even baked potatoes left unrefrigerated. As little as 0.001 microgram per kilogram body weight may be lethal. The time from ingestion of the toxin until clinical signs are observed will vary with the amount of toxin ingested. The onset of clinical signs may be as short as a few hours but is seldom more than 24 hours. A very small amount of material containing the toxin can cause symptoms. Signs can develop rapidly and death can occur in a little as 6 hours after initial onset. Clinical signs may begin in human beings between 12-36 hours after ingestion of the toxin. The clinical signs and symptoms in human beings include ptosis, blurred vision, diplopia (double vision), dry mouth and throat, dysphagia, and dysphoria [feeling unwell]. These are a result of cranial nerve palsies. These early signs are followed by symmetrical descending flaccid paralysis, with generalized weakness and progression to respiratory failure. - Mod.LL]
