Daily Trust [edited]<http://www.dailytrust.com.ng/news/general/how-mysterious-disease-killed-many-in-kebbi/134492.html>The cause of the death of several people in Yauri Local Government Area [LGA] of Kebbi State has remained a mystery. While the state authorities attribute it to the outbreak of cerebrospinal meningitis, the locals believe it is simply witchcraft or a Jin spirit that struck.The victims were initially said to have complained of severe headache, stomach pain and high body temperature. They all died within 24 hours after contracting the disease. There are divergent views about the number of deaths so far recorded, with some putting it at 10; others claiming they are higher since the disease manifested. Thus, it remains a source of controversy even when state officials maintain there was no death recorded because those that were brought to Yauri General Hospital had been treated and discharged.Community leaders contacted refused to talk because they were asked not to by the Emir of Yauri, Dr Zayyanu Abdullahi. However, some locals who spoke to Daily Trust confirmed that many deaths were recorded as a result of the disease, which emanated from Kasuwan Albasa (Onion market) very close to Yauri River, a tributary of the Niger.The market is patronized by farmers from different states, particularly the neighbouring Niger State, whose locals transport their farm produce to the market by canoe. A resident of Yauri, Alhaji Shehu Wakala, said the death toll has as of Thursday 18 [Feb 2016] reached 17, saying it was a mysterious disease because it strikes only those with links to the market.A trader at the market said the disease started manifesting in the market on Mon 8 Feb [2016], when the market was filled to capacity. ""I was in the shop when I was told of the disease. And few minutes later the market became deserted by traders for fear of contacting it,"" he recounted, adding that it was after 2 days that people started returning and opened their shops for business, and there had been no report of such disease since then.An onion dealer who spoke on condition of anonymity confirmed that 4 deaths had been recorded in the market on that fateful Monday. 2 of the people that died were female and two male, including a purified-water hawker and a sugar-cane trader. He could not tell the actual cause of the deaths, but revealed there were conflicting reports about it, with some saying it was a spirit that struck, while others attributed it to witchcraft, and some health workers from Birnin Kebbi who visited the market said their investigation showed it was cerebrospinal meningitis.He however believed that the disease was caused by contaminated water from the river, which he said was used by virtually all the traders for drinking and performing ablution, as it remains the only source of water in the area and environs. ""We had made several complaints to the local authorities that we need a clean source of water in the area, but nothing has been done about it. The last time our chairman complained they said they were looking for private individuals who would provide such amenities and manage them, but that was not forthcoming,"" he said.When contacted, chairman of the traders association declined to speak until there was written permission from the Emirate Council. He intimated that they were summoned and warned by the council not to grant any interview to the media unless there was a written permission duly signed by the secretary of the palace. The secretary on the other hand said it was the principal medical officer of the Yauri General Hospital who has been authorised to speak on the matter by the ministry. But the principal officer declined to comment on the matter, saying nobody authorised him to entertain any questions from the press.However, a [member of] senior medical personnel in the hospital confirmed that based on the outcome of their investigation, the disease was the result of the outbreak of cerebrospinal meningitis. He denied that it was witchcraft or a spirit and revealed they were on top of the situation. ""I don't practice witchcraft. I don't believe in it. This is what the people out there have been saying. As a result of the disease, an isolation centre was opened at Rukuballo which is a few kilometers from the city,"" he said, adding that 9 people who suffered the attack were treated and discharged at the centre and 7 were presently on admission and responding to treatment. He said that no deaths had been recorded in the centre and if there [had been], [they must have been] outside the facility.In addition, patients were provided with enough drugs and there was an Abuja-based organization which visited the facility and promised to support them. It was observed at the isolation centre that few people were on admission and they were managed with only 2 nurses, who kept sealed lips on the matter.Sadly, [a] 14 year old was not fortunate to be among the survivors. Her father said his daughter was among the vendors at the onion market, selling pure water. He recalled her breaking the news of the outbreak of the disease to her grandmother, who in turn asked her not to go there again but she was adamant. She later complained of headache, stomach pain, and fever after returning from the market on Monday [15 Feb 2016] and she was taken to a herbalist who said she was suffering from spiritual attack and gave them some herbs. After taking it she was relieved that night. But her condition worsened the following day and her uncle was called after which he decided to take her to the hospital but she died on the way.The Kebbi State government, in a statement signed by special adviser to Governor Atiku Bagudu on health, Dr Fatima Mustapha Bunza, said the recent 'strange' killer disease in Yauri, Yauri LGA has not put the state at epidemic threshold. It said it was caused by cerebrospinal meningitis, adding that the outbreak was reported from Yauri town in Yauri LGA on 8 Feb 2016 with additional cases on 13 Fri Feb 2016, making a total of 9 cases. [The statement] read: ""An isolation camp was immediately established in Yauri and samples for laboratory investigations dispatched to the laboratory in Sokoto.""The statement continued: ""2 out of 9 samples tested were confirmed positive for [_Neisseria meningitidis_ ] serotype C. A single case from Andarai in Maiyama LGA was earlier confirmed in January [2016]. The 1st confirmed case was treated and discharged in January [2016] and currently the 2 confirmed cases are responding to treatment at the isolation camp in Yauri. With these numbers alone, we are not yet at the epidemic threshold, but we should all be on the alert and intensify surveillance in all our communities as the government of Kebbi State deploys proactive measures to forestall escalation of the situation.""The statement also revealed that the state government has already instituted some measures, which included the state's rapid-response team and the Yauri LGA teams which were activated from the 1st day of the report. In addition, CSM [cerebrospinal meningitis] Treatment protocol has been shared to all the disease surveillance and notification officers (DSNOs) and some test lumbar puncture kits were also shared. More kits are being expected from World Health Organization (WHO) country office.It further intimated that an active case search supported by DSNOs, as well as WHO, is on-going, including community mobilisation, advocacy and sensitisation of traditional leaders in the LGA. In this regard, Kebbi State government is working with the Federal Ministry of Health, National Primary Health Care Development Agency (NPHCDA) and Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (CDC) to mobilise support to contain further spread as well as secure vaccines for dual purposes of prevention and [creating] immunity within the population, based on available results and epidemiological history.[byline: Anyichie Tochukwu]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Nigeria falls within the African Meningitis Belt, the semi-arid areas of sub-Saharan Africa where epidemics of meningococcal meningitis recur each year during the hot, dry season, between December and June. _Neisseria meningitidis_ serogroup A has been the main cause of epidemic meningococcal disease in this region (<http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/meningitis/whoemcbac983.pdf>). However, since the introduction of the meningococcal A conjugate vaccine in countries of the African meningitis belt in 2010, WHO has noted a decrease in the number of cases of meningitis; in fact, the number of cases in 2013 was the lowest recorded during the epidemic season in the last 10 years (<http://www.who.int/csr/don/2013_06_06_menin/en/>), and _N. meningitidis_ serogroup A was noted to be no longer the predominant pathogen, having been replaced by other serogroups.ProMED-mail previously reported in 2015 on the emergence of outbreaks of meningitis due to _N. meningitidis_ serogroup C in Kebbi State (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kebbi>) in north west Nigeria (see alsos below). The emergence of serogroup C outbreaks in the African Meningitis Belt has been thought to be evidence of serogroup replacement in the meningitis belt following mass vaccination with serogroup A conjugate vaccine.The above news release reports the recurrence of the serogroup C meningitis outbreak in Kebbi State in north west Nigeria since January 2016. Several vaccines are available to control the disease during an outbreak: a meningococcal A conjugate vaccine, C conjugate vaccines, tetravalent A, C, Y, and W conjugate vaccines and meningococcal polysaccharide vaccines. Unlike polysaccharide vaccines, conjugate vaccines reduce the carriage of meningococci in the throat and thus its transmission, as well as confer a more sustained immune response, and therefore longer-term protection, than the polysaccharide vaccines. Consideration should be given to vaccination with of tetravalent conjugate vaccine to control this outbreak. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1279>.]
