Muscat Daily [edited]<http://www.muscatdaily.com/Archive/Oman/MoAF-confirms-CCHF-death-takes-steps-to-control-spread-of-virus-4mfa#ixzz40sh2lRby>The [Oman] Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MoAF) has refuted rumours on social media about the spread of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) in Buraimi [Al Buraimi governorate]. However, it has confirmed the death of one Omani due to this infection, and has said that measures are being taken to control its spread. Details of how the man got the CCHF virus are not known.Unconfirmed reports suggested it was after he bought goats from a livestock farm in Buraimi. The immediate action taken after the death was to spray insecticides on the farm, said Ali bin Awadh al Yaqoubi, director of Agriculture and Livestock in Buraimi. Yaqoubi told Oman TV that the quarantined farm will be closed for 14 days.""Samples from the farm have been sent to the Animal Health Research Centre Laboratory to determine if it has indeed been infected by CCHF,"" he added. Veterinary authorities are constantly working in the governorate to spread awareness about CCHF.Yaqoubi cautioned against spreading rumours and called on people to receive information from official sources. MoAF and the Ministry of Regional Municipalities and Water Resources are taking steps to create awareness on the issue. CCHF is carried by ticks and is endemic to Oman. It does not cause any symptoms in animals and is transmitted through tick bites or direct contact with the infected animal's blood, often through slaughtered animals. ""So, to prevent the spread of the disease, it is advisable to slaughter animals at municipal slaughterhouses, where vets perform ante-mortem and post-mortem examinations,"" MoAF stated.According to MoAF, 14 CCHF cases were reported in 2014, 10 came to light in 2013, and 3 tested positive in 2012. Apart from these, 3 cases were recorded in 1995 and one in 1996. After 6 cases of CCHF -- including a death -- were reported from the sultanate during Eid al Adha [Festival of the Sacrifice, 3-4 Oct 2014] alone in 2014, authorities have been taking preventive measures to curb the spread of the disease. MoAF has tightened quarantine measures and procedures for live animals to make sure they are free of ticks and other external parasites.""Necessary samples are taken and sent to the central laboratory for tests, and animals are released from quarantine only after making sure they are free of ticks or any other diseases,"" the ministry said in a statement. The ministry also collects random samples from farms and barns for testing.""A large scale pesticide spraying schedule has been drawn out wherein barn animals are sprayed, and spraying machines and equipment are provided to farm owners,"" MoAF added.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka[Cases of CCHF virus infection have occurred previously in Oman. An 18 Oct 2014 ProMED-mail post (archive no. 20141018.2878362) indicated that there were 6 cases of CCHF in the country that year with one death, and the case number climbed to 16 in November 2014. An Omani case reported in ProMED-mail (archive no. 20120123.1019272) in 2012 was suspected due to contact with animals illegally imported into Oman. In that post, Mod.AS noted, ""CCHF virus (CCHFV) circulates in an enzootic tick-vertebrate-tick cycle; members of the tick genus _Hyalomma_ seem to be the principal vectors. The virus can be found in many species of wild and domestic mammals, including cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, horses, donkeys, and dogs. There is no evidence that the virus causes disease in animals. Domesticated ruminants including cattle, sheep, and goats are viremic for one week after experimental infections; the only symptom was a transient, mild elevation in body temperature. The introduction of viremic, symptomless animals to slaughterhouses can expose their personnel to infection. Otherwise, infected ticks are the main link between infected animals and humans; acaricides can be used on livestock and other domesticated animals to control ticks, particularly before slaughter or export.In meat, CCHFV is usually inactivated by post-slaughter acidification. It is also killed by cooking. Unpasteurized milk should not be drunk.""Maps of Oman can be seen at be accessed at <http://www.mapsofworld.com/oman/maps/oman-political-map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/25908>. - Mod.TY]
