KXLY, CNN report [edited]<http://www.kxly.com/news/ebola/grand-jury-indicts-surgical-tech-accused-of-tampering-with-syringe/38054734>A grand jury has indicted a former surgical tech whose alleged drug tampering spurred a Colorado hospital to warn thousands of patients that they could have been exposed to hepatitis B, hepatitis C or HIV. The person, 28, was indicted on charges of tampering with a consumer product and obtaining a controlled substance by deceit, federal officials announced Tuesday, 16 Feb 2016.The indictment accuses the former employee of Swedish Medical Center in Englewood, Colorado, of tampering with a syringe containing pain medication there and knowingly acquiring the medication ""by deception and subterfuge."" He did so, officials allege, ""with reckless disregard for the risk that another person will be placed in danger of bodily injury, and under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to such risk.""Earlier in February 2016, Swedish Medical Center said a former employee could have exposed patients to hepatitis and HIV, but did not name the employee or detail how the patients could have been put at risk. The employee, officials said, could have stolen narcotic pain medication intended for patients. The hospital said about 2900 patients should get tested for the viruses, adding that it had no evidence of any patient exposure but wanted to be cautious.According to state regulators, the former employee allegedly removed a syringe containing the pain medication fentanyl from an anesthesia cart and replaced it with another labeled syringe ""in the beginning stages of a surgical procedure"" on 22 Jan 2016. Prosecutors say the replacement syringe contained another substance. The former employee's urine later tested positive for fentanyl, regulators said in an order suspending his license in January 2016.A lawyer says he is representing 14 people who are among the former surgery patients the hospital said should get tested. At least 2 have tested positive for hepatitis B, said the lawyer.Hospital officials declined to comment. A spokesman for the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment told CNN affiliate KMGH that officials are not releasing details about whether patients have tested positive for the viruses at this time. ""CDPHE is not releasing information about lab results, either positive or negative, related to the Swedish Medical Center ... at least until completion of our investigation -- likely weeks to months from now,"" spokesman Mark Salley said, according to KMGH.Since the Colorado hospital's announcement, 2 hospitals in Arizona where [the employee] once worked have also said they are offering free hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV testing to patients who had surgery while he worked there. HonorHealth John C. Lincoln Medical Center in Phoenix said it's offering testing to 97 patients and Banner Thunderbird Medical Center in Glendale said it would offer free testing to patients who underwent surgery there from 19 May 2014 to 2 Jul 2014. Both hospitals said they believe the risk is low that patients contracted the viruses, and that they are recommending testing out of an abundance of caution.In 2009, a surgical technician at another Colorado hospital infected 19 patients with hepatitis C after she injected herself with syringes that held their pain medication, then replaced the pain medication in their syringes with saline. The technician pleaded guilty to a number of federal charges and was sentenced to 30 years in prison.--Communicated by:Celeste Whitlow<whitlow.celeste@gmail.com>[If hepatitis B was transmitted by tainted syringes if would likely be related to the former surgery technician contaminating the syringes with his own blood. It is not acquired from the environment per se. It is not clearly reported if he was chronically infected with hepatitis B virus or any bloodborne virus. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/209>.]
