Vanguard [edited]<http://www.vanguardngr.com/2016/02/lagos-strange-killer-disease-laboratory-tests-show-measles-virus/>The Lagos State Government, yesterday, confirmed that the blood samples of victims of the epidemic of febrile rash illness that claimed the lives of over 20 children in Otodo Gbame community in Eto-Osa Local Government Area of the state showed measles virus.Giving an update at a briefing in Lagos, the state Commissioner for Health, Dr. Jide Idris, said all the blood samples taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory, Yaba, tested positive for IgM, a blood marker for recent infection with measles virus.He added that 4 throat swaps and one blood sample investigated at the virology reference laboratory, LUTH, indicated the presence of measles virus through the polymerase chain reaction [PCR] technique.He attributed the epidemic to poor environmental sanitation, lack of potable water in the area and missed immunisation in the area.According to him, the result of the water samples analysed at the Drug Quality Control Laboratory yielded several pathogens, an indication that the well water is not safe for human consumption.To this end, the ministry will tomorrow dispatch another combined team of experts from the ministries of Environment, Health and other relevant agencies to conduct proper assessment of the environment.The commissioner also disclosed that the ministry had directed all local government areas to take inventory of all slums in their areas to ensure prompt response and prevent an epidemic outbreak. He said: ""We are taking census of slums in Lagos because the number of deaths was unusual. It must have been complicated by malnutrition.""The area was not designed for residential purposes, but was a reclaimed land. That may have been the major reason why the children were missed during immunisation.""Right now, awareness and community sensitisation is ongoing. Active case search is also ongoing. Members of the public and health workers are to report any strange illness to the nearest health facility ... - more.""[Byline: Chioma Obinna]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka[The disease measles is completely preventable. This disease is one of the leading causes of death among young children even though a safe and cost-effective vaccine is available. It is unfortunate these children were not vaccinated.Measles is a highly contagious, serious disease caused by a virus. In 1980, before widespread vaccination, measles caused an estimated 2.6 million deaths each year.The disease remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally, despite the availability of a safe and effective vaccine. Approximately 114 900 people died from measles in 2014, mostly children under the age of 5.Measles is caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family, and it is normally passed through direct contact and through the air. The virus infects the mucous membranes then spreads throughout the body. Measles is a human disease and is not known to occur in animals.Accelerated immunization activities have had a major impact on reducing measles deaths. During 2000-2014, measles vaccination prevented an estimated 17.1 million deaths. Global measles deaths have decreased by 79 per cent from an estimated 546 800 in 2000 to 114 900 in 2014. That translates to about 314 deaths every day or 13 deaths every hour.In 2014, about 85 per cent of the world's children received one dose of measles vaccine by their 1st birthday through routine health services, up from 73 per cent in 2000. During 2000-2014, measles vaccination prevented an estimated 17.1 million deaths making measles vaccine one of the best buys in public health.Measles is still common in many developing countries, particularly in parts of Africa and Asia. The overwhelming majority (more than 95 per cent) of measles deaths occur in countries with low per capita incomes and weak health infrastructures.Measles outbreaks can be particularly deadly in countries experiencing or recovering from a natural disaster or conflict. Damage to health infrastructure and health services interrupts routine immunization, and overcrowding in residential camps greatly increases the risk of infection [Excerpted from WHO at <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/>]. - Mod.LK][Malnutrition in general and vitamin A deficiency in particular are linked to poor outcome in measles and, as mentioned in the media report, may be linked to the high mortality observed here.  - Mod.LMA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/62>.]
