Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 21550 (2016) [edited]<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep21550>Appearance of Beta-lactam Resistance Genes in Agricultural Soils and Clinical Isolates over the 20th Century--------------------------------------------------------------------------------Graham DW, Knapp CW, Christensen BT, McCluskey S, Dolfing J.Abstract--------Debate exists about whether agricultural versus medical antibiotic use drives increasing antibiotic resistance (AR) across nature. Both sectors have been inconsistent at antibiotic stewardship, but it is unclear which sector has most influenced acquired AR on broad scales. Using qPCR [quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction] and soils archived since 1923 at Askov Experimental Station in Denmark, we quantified 4 broad-spectrum beta-lactam AR genes (ARG; blaTEM, blaSHV, blaOXA and blaCTX-M) and class-1 integron genes (int1) in soils from manured (M) versus inorganic fertilised (IF) fields. ""Total"" beta-lactam ARG levels were significantly higher in M versus IF in soils post-1940 (paired-t test; p less than 0.001). However, dominant individual ARGs varied over time; blaTEM and blaSHV between 1963 and 1974, blaOXA slightly later, and blaCTX-M since 1988. These dates roughly parallel 1st reporting of these genes in clinical isolates, suggesting ARGs in animal manure and humans are historically interconnected. Archive data further show when non-therapeutic antibiotic use was banned in Denmark, blaCTX-M levels declined in M soils, suggesting accumulated soil ARGs can be reduced by prudent antibiotic stewardship. Conversely, int1 levels have continued to increase in M soils since 1990, implying direct manure application to soils should be scrutinized as part of future stewardship programs.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Beta-lactam resistance is now commonly mediated by extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) genes encoded on plasmids, which facilitate horizontal gene transfer between bacteria of the same or different species. Hundreds of ESBLs have been described; many are derived from genes for TEM-1, TEM-2, or SHV-1 beta-lactamases by point mutations. TEM-1 and TEM-2 hydrolyze penicillins and narrow spectrum cephalosporins, such as cephalothin or cefazolin, but not higher generation cephalosporins. The point mutations alter the amino acid configuration around the active site of these beta-lactamases and thereby extend the spectrum to include cephalosporins with an oxyimino side chain (such as cefotaxime, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, cefepime, or cefpodoxime) and the oxyimino-monobactam aztreonam. The early TEM and SHV ESBLs were 1st isolated in Western Europe in mid 1980s. An increasing number of ESBLs of lineages other than TEM or SHV lineages have been subsequently described, such as OXA and CTX-M enzymes. CTX-M-producing strains have dramatically increased since the 1990s. CTX-M enzymes, as the name implies, have greater activity against cefotaxime than other oxyimino-beta-lactam substrates. Many CTX-M enzymes are currently known. CTX-M-15 is widespread in _Escherichia coli_ in the UK and is prevalent in the community. OXA beta-lactamases hydrolyze oxacillin and related anti-staphylococcal penicillins. Amino acid substitutions in OXA enzymes have given the OXA type an ESBL phenotype. While most TEM, SHV, and CTX-M ESBLs have been found in _E. coli_, _Klebsiella pneumoniae_, and other Enterobacteriaceae, the OXA-type ESBLs have been found mainly in _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_. ESBLs are grouped into 4 molecular classes, A, B, C and D enzymes. Class A, C, and D enzymes utilize serine for beta-lactam hydrolysis and class B are metalloenzymes, which require divalent zinc ions for substrate hydrolysis (<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2825993/>). The OXA type belongs to molecular class D, while TEM, SHV and CTX-M enzymes belong to class A.Integrons are one of the latest genetic structures that are involved in the spread of multidrug resistance. They are mobile DNA elements that can capture, incorporate and transport multiple resistance genes located on cassettes. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/111>.]
