WBAY [edited]<http://wbay.com/2016/02/23/doctors-seeing-more-serious-cases-of-common-virus-in-young-children/>Doctors across our area [Green Bay, Brown County, Wisconsin] are asking parents to be vigilant after a spike in young children with respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV. Doctors see a lot of cases every year, but they're seeing more serious cases this season.RSV is a virus that infects lungs and breathing passages. It's usually most severe in young children and the elderly. It can start as a cold with symptoms like a cough and runny nose, but more serious cases can lead to lung disease.RSV can become something called bronchiolitis. Dr. Ament says most cases are handled outside of the hospital. ""They start breathing fast; normally a toddler should be breathing 25 times a minute,"" said Dr. Ament. ""If all of a sudden mom notices one day he/she is breathing 50, 60 times a minute, that should probably catch her attention.""But the number of cases that do require hospital care have gone up. Last year, HSHS [Hospital Sisters Health System] St. Vincent and St. Mary's Hospitals had 70 cases of RSV. This year, they've seen 102 cases so far.""Yes, the numbers are probably up,"" said Dr. Ament, ""but to me, more importantly, I think they're sicker than in previous years.""Dr. Ament says it's important for parents to know what to look for beyond a cold, so they know when to bring their kids into the doctor's office.""If they don't have a wet diaper for multiple hours, or you notice they're not drinking well, those would be indications you should probably see the doctor,"" said Dr. Ament.To prevent it? Dr. Ament says washing your hands, and coughing correctly is key, but it may be unavoidable if your child is around someone infected.""In general though, if a child in the age range that we're talking about, toddlers, comes in contact with others that have the illness and are coughing in their face, there's a good chance they're going to get it,"" said Dr. Ament.[Byline: Clare Kaley]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka[RSV can cause upper respiratory infections (such as colds) and lower respiratory tract infections (such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia). In children younger than 1 year of age, RSV is the most common cause of bronchiolitis, an inflammation of the small airways in the lung, and pneumonia, an infection of the lungs.Almost all children will have had an RSV infection by their 2nd birthday. When infants and children are exposed to RSV for the 1st time, - 25 to 40 out of 100 of them have signs or symptoms of bronchiolitis or pneumonia, and - 5 to 20 out of 1000 will require hospitalization. Most children hospitalized for RSV infection are younger than 6 months of age.Symptoms of RSV infection are similar to other respiratory infections. Illness usually begins 4 to 6 days after exposure (range: 2 to 8 days) with a runny nose and decrease in appetite. Coughing, sneezing, and fever typically develop 1 to 3 days later. Wheezing may also occur. In very young infants, irritability, decreased activity, and breathing difficulties may be the only symptoms of infection. Most otherwise healthy infants infected with RSV do not need to be hospitalized. In most cases, even among those who need to be hospitalized, hospitalization usually only lasts a few days, and full recovery from illness occurs in about 1 to 2 weeks. However, even after recovery, very young infants and children with weakened immune systems can continue to spread the virus for 1 to 3 weeks. People infected with RSV are usually contagious for 3 to 8 days.People of any age can get another RSV infection, but infections later in life are generally less severe. Premature infants, children younger than 2 years of age with congenital heart or chronic lung disease, and children with compromised (weakened) immune systems due to a medical condition or medical treatment are at highest risk for severe disease. Adults with compromised immune systems and those 65 and older are also at increased risk of severe disease.RSV can be spread when an infected person coughs or sneezes into the air, creating virus-containing droplets that can linger briefly in the air. Other people can become infected if the droplet particles contact their nose, mouth, or eye.Infection can also result from direct and indirect contact with nasal or oral secretions from infected people. Direct contact with the virus can occur, for example, by kissing the face of a child with RSV. Indirect contact can occur if the virus gets on an environmental surface, such as a doorknob, that is then touched by other people. Direct and indirect transmissions of virus usually occur when people touch an infectious secretion and then rub their eyes or nose.RSV can survive on hard surfaces such as tables and crib rails for many hours. RSV typically lives on soft surfaces such as tissues and hands for shorter amounts of time.In the United States and other areas with similar climates, RSV infections generally occur during fall, winter, and spring. The timing and severity of RSV circulation in a given community can vary from year to year.Excerpted and edited from CDC [<http://www.cdc.gov/rsv/about/symptoms.html>].Information from other major hospitals throughout the northern hemisphere is welcome. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/250>.]
