Evening Standard [edited]<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/health/thousands-called-in-for-hepatitis-c-tests-after-nhs-workers-positive-diagnosis-a3187051.html>More than 8000 patients across the UK are being urged to arrange blood tests after it emerged an NHS worker tested positive for hepatitis C.The worker did not return to clinical practice after testing positive in 2008. But NHS Lanarkshire [Scotland] is now working with other health boards across the UK to notify people who may have had a surgical procedure carried out by the individual between 1982 and 2008. The employee worked in hospitals across Lanarkshire during the period, mainly in Wishaw General Hospital and the former Law Hospital as well as at the William Harvey Hospital in Kent [southeast England] for 3 months between January and April 2006.When the worker initially tested positive in 2008, the UK Advisory Panel (UKAP) said patients did not need to be warned as the risk was thought to be low, but 2 positive cases have now emerged. It was found a patient referred for treatment for hepatitis C in Lanarkshire in 2015 had previously had a surgical procedure carried out by the infected healthcare worker. Further investigations found it was ""probable"" the patient was infected with the virus during a surgical procedure carried out by the individual and another similar case has now been found.The health board said: ""After detailed investigations, including extensive testing of viruses, NHS Lanarkshire submitted a report to UKAP. UKAP endorsed NHS Lanarkshire's proposal to carry out a patient notification exercise. ""Patients are receiving a detailed question-and-answer sheet with their letter which includes information about hepatitis C and how to arrange to be tested.""In total, 8383 patients across the UK are to receive letters informing them of the situation and urging them to arrange a blood test. The vast majority -- 7311 -- are in Lanarkshire, with more than 700 across the rest of Scotland, 336 in England, a further 11 in Wales, and 5 in Northern Ireland. Dr Iain Wallace, medical director at NHS Lanarkshire, said: ""We would like to reassure people that the likelihood of patients acquiring the virus from a surgical procedure carried out by the healthcare worker is low.""The virus infects the liver and can cause serious and potentially life-threatening damage. Around 215 000 people in the UK have hepatitis C, according to the NHS. It is usually spread through blood-to-blood contact and can be passed by sharing unsterilized needles, razors, or toothbrushes.[Byline: Robin De Peyer]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Most of the transmission of blood-borne viruses in the healthcare setting occurs from an infected patient to the healthcare worker via a blood-tainted needle stick or patient-to-patient via contamination of reusable equipment, such as a glucometer. Spread from a healthcare worker to a patient can certainly occur especially during a breach of appropriate infection control. In today's world, however, with effective medications available to suppress the viremia in either hepatitis B or C and in HIV infection, such transmission could be exceedingly uncommon. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/2908>.]
