CBS4 Denver [edited]<http://denver.cbslocal.com/2016/02/24/mumps-outbreak-in-denver-county-investigated/>Public health officials are investigating an outbreak of 6 mumps cases in Denver County [Colorado]. The outbreak is among a group of residents and health care personnel.Officials believe the source of the infection is thought to be a person who recently moved to Colorado from Iowa with additional infections resulting from exposures in a health care setting. Iowa has been experiencing an ongoing outbreak of mumps since July 2015.While infectious, the person socialized with a group of 3 friends who all subsequently developed unilateral parotid swelling and tenderness in late January [2016]. Those people were evaluated and treated for mumps at the Denver Adult Urgent Care Clinic on 2 Feb 2016.""All had some jaw swelling in this region which is pretty common for mumps. They also had low grade temperatures and just felt ill,"" infectious disease Dr. Heather Young told CBS4 Health Specialist Kathy Walsh.Young is a physician at Denver Health Medical Center and serves as the hospital's epidemiologist.20 days later, 2 health care personnel who treated those patients at the urgent care clinic developed symptoms consistent with mumps. ""Not having a high awareness that mumps in the community leads to other spread,"" said Young.Young said all 6 of the adult patients had been vaccinated against the disease. She said the mumps vaccine is about 88 percent effective and immunity can wane after about 15 to 20 years. ""Right now, we're not recommending another vaccine. But we'll wait for further guidance from the CDPHE (Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment),"" said Young.Mumps cases are usually mild, but some can have serious complications. ""Some of those are inflammation of the brain or encephalitis, inflammation of the testes which can lead to fertility problems in men or inflammation of the ovaries or breasts in women,"" explained Young.Denver Health is contacting those who visited Denver Health Adult Urgent Care Clinic on 28, 30, 31 Jan, 2 Feb 2016.Additional Information from the Colorado Department of Health and Environment-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Mumps is a viral infection that can cause painful swelling of one or more of the salivary glands, typically the parotid glands. Other symptoms may include low-grade fever, malaise, and headache, but approximately 1/3rd of infected persons do not have clinically apparent illness so cases often go undetected. Severe complications from mumps are rare, but can include inflammation of the brain and/or tissue covering the brain and spinal cord, inflammation of the ovaries and/or breast, sterility, orchitis, spontaneous abortion, or deafness. Despite high vaccination rates and an effective vaccine, cases are likely to occur among vaccinated individuals because the vaccine is not 100 percent effective (estimated effectiveness for 2 doses is 88 percent) and vaccine-induced immunity can wane.Infection control-----------------Mumps is transmitted by direct contact with respiratory droplets or saliva from an infected person. Mumps may be spread by freshly contaminated fomites. The average incubation period is 16-18 days, with a range of 12-25 days. The period of maximum communicability is from 1-2 days before onset of salivary gland swelling to 5 days after onset of salivary gland swelling.For disease investigation purposes, consider mumps cases infectious 2 days prior to salivary gland swelling through 6 days of swelling (5 days after swelling onset with the day of onset counted as day 0).[Byline: Kathy Walsh]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] USA (Kentucky): increase in activity mumpsDate: Sun 21 Feb 2016Source: Beacon Transcript [edited]<http://www.beacontranscript.com/the-mumps-is-spreading-like-wildfire-in-the-us/5343/>The University of Kentucky has recently reported that the health authorities identified 3 more cases of mumps among students. According to the CDC, the mumps is spreading like wildfire in the US, with 69 confirmed cases so far. Mostly viewed as a childhood disease, mumps can have some nasty effects once you grow older. And even as a child, it can put your life at risk. The mumps, also called epidemic parotitis (the inflammation of the salivary glands), is mainly caused by the mumps virus.The most common symptoms associated with this disease are fever, headache and muscle pain. However, some of the patients reported fatigue after contracting the mumps virus. These symptoms usually resurface within an interval of 16 to 18 days, although in some cases it may take longer (12 to 25 days).According to the medical literature, most of the symptoms associated with epidemic parotitis are mild, but, in some instances, the patients can suffer from complications. The CDC notes that the most common complication associated with the mumps are meningitis or inflammation of the brain. Approximately 15 percent of the patients diagnosed with the mumps can suffer from this complication.The virus can also induce pancreatitis in approximately 4 percent of the patients. Perhaps the most severe complication that can occur is permanent deafness. Moreover, it is also a known fact that older patients treated for the mumps can become infertile.Other complications associated with this childhood disease are swelling of the testicles or of the ovaries and swelling of the breasts.How is the disease transmitted? According to the CDC, everyone infected with the mumps virus is a carrier, regardless of how severe the case is. Usually, epidemic parotitis is transmitted by droplets of saliva or mucus from an infected person. Anyone who is infected can infect others in return through sneezes, coughs or talking. Sharing personal objects like toothbrushes, towel or cups can also help the virus to spread.Unfortunately, there is no cure for the disease, only supportive care. In case someone comes down with mumps, doctors recommend lots of bed rest, fluids and if necessary, to apply either ice or heat to the neck or to the groin. If the pain becomes acute, the patient can take pain relief medicine like acetaminophen.Moreover, the doctors have noted that gargles with water and soft food may ease the symptoms. As precautionary methods, the physicians urge their patients not to take aspirin for mumps. In some children, taking aspirin has caused another disease called Reye's syndrome.The mumps is spreading like wildfire in the US, and the CDC recommends that all who have been exposed should go to the nearest clinic in order to receive 2 doses of the MMR vaccine.[Byline: Angelina Stapp]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>[Mumps is no longer very common in the United States. From year to year, mumps cases can range from roughly a couple hundred to a couple thousand. For example, 2010 was a peak year with 2612 cases, while in 2012, there were 229. In 2014 and 2015, there were 1223 and 1057 cases, respectively. Before the US mumps vaccination program started in 1967, about 186 000 cases were reported each year. Since the pre-vaccine era, there has been a more than 99 per cent decrease in mumps cases in the United States.In some years, there are more cases of mumps than usual because of outbreaks. Mumps outbreaks can occur any time of year but often occur in winter and spring.MMR vaccine prevents most, but not all, cases of mumps and complications caused by the disease. Two doses of the vaccine are 88 per cent (range: 66-95 per cent) effective at protecting against mumps; one dose is 78 per cent (range: 49-92 per cent) effective. Outbreaks can still occur in highly vaccinated US communities, particularly in close-contact settings.Extracted and edited from <http://www.cdc.gov/mumps/outbreaks.html>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/220>.]
