WHO, Weekly Epidemiological Record (WER) 20168: 89-104 [edited]<http://www.who.int/entity/wer/2016/wer9108.pdf?ua=1>Plague around the world, 2010-2015----------------------------------Plague is a bacterial infection mainly affecting small mammals and transmitted by fleas. The geographical distribution of the disease is very focalized. Occasionally, the pathogen _Yersinia pestis_ can infect humans through infected flea bites. Human plague is a serious disease, particularly in its septicaemic and pneumonic forms. The pneumonic form, invariably fatal unless treated early, is especially contagious and can trigger terrifying epidemics through direct person-to-person contact. In these circumstances, plague is simultaneously a medical and a public health emergency.Between 1 Jan 2010 and 31 Dec 2015, 3248 cases of plague in humans were reported, resulting in 584 deaths (Table 1) [for Table, see source URL above. - Mod.LL]. The principal animal reservoir (which differs from region to region) and local socioeconomic conditions are determinants of the epidemiological characteristics of the disease and the risk of transmission to humans. Plague is a disease of poverty in Africa, South America, and India, where the animal reservoir essentially comprises commensal rodents, but tends to be a sporadic disease associated with outdoor occupations in the other endemic regions.Africa------In Africa, 4 countries still regularly report cases.Madagascar is the most seriously affected country in the world. The surveillance system is relatively effective, thanks to the support of the national Pasteur Institute. Thus, specimens are taken from 95 percent of suspected cases and nearly 55 percent of these are confirmed as plague cases. Incidence has declined in the last 2 years but there has been an increase in the overall case fatality rate (23 percent in 2015) associated with the higher frequency of pneumonic forms (23.3 percent). This increase in serious forms of the disease is symptomatic of the deteriorating fabric of the health system as a result of the recent social and political crisis in the country. In 2014, one case of pneumonic plague (with a subsequently fatal outcome) was confirmed in the capital, Antananarivo. The rapid response of the health authorities fortunately prevented the emergence of any secondary cases.The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has seen incidence rates collapse in recent years, but it is unlikely that this indicates a decrease in real terms. The 2 endemic health districts with a population of 1.9 million are located in the north-east of the country, a troubled region where the surveillance system is coming under increasing strain. In addition to sporadic cases, the region is regularly affected by epidemics affecting dozens of people: in 2014, for example, there was an epidemic of bubonic plague with a case-fatality rate of 8.7 percent and another of pneumonic plague with a case-fatality rate of more than 41 percent.Uganda shares the same plague focus as the DRC and reports cases every year in Arua region. 30 percent of these cases are confirmed by laboratory diagnosis.At the end of 2014, an epidemic of bubonic plague occurred in Mbule district in the Manyara region of the United Republic of Tanzania, resulting in the deaths of 5 of the 38 people affected. None of the cases were confirmed using international standards, however.It should be noted that no cases have been reported in North Africa, a region that witnessed several re-emergent outbreaks in the previous decade.The Americas------------In the Americas, Peru regularly reports cases in 4 regions in the north-west of the country, where new foci emerged in 2013. These are essentially sporadic cases of bubonic plague associated with farming activities in rural areas. The return of the El Nino weather pattern in 2016 might go hand in hand with a recrudescence of plague, as has been noted on previous occasions.In the western United States of America (USA), plague circulates among wild rodents in rural and semi-rural areas, resulting in several cases every year. Humans are regularly infected through contact with domestic animals (cats or dogs). In 2014, 3 people in Colorado developed pneumonic plague following exposure to a sick animal and a fourth person might have been infected through contact with one of these patients, making this the first possible case of person-to-person transmission recorded in the USA since 1924.Asia----It is thought that plague originated in Central Asia, and this region is still the biggest natural focus of the disease. However, the at-risk population is restricted to breeders and hunters because the reservoirs consist mainly of gerbils in the steppe and marmots in mountainous areas. Consequently, the risk of transmission to humans is very low and outbreaks of the disease in people are totally sporadic.Two marmot hunters contracted bubonic plague, one in Kyrgyzstan in 2013, the other in the Russian Federation in 2014. Kyrgyzstan had seen no cases of human plague since 1981, and in the Gorno-Altaisk mountains in the Russian Federation, this was the 1st case since 1961.Mongolia and China sporadically report similar cases.Discussion----------By simply monitoring the incidence of human plague cases, we can only get a partial picture of the true extent of circulation of the microorganism in nature, and hence of the risk to people. Among endemic countries that have reported no cases in the period 2010-2015, some, for example India or Kazakhstan, carry out planned and regular entomological and zoological surveillance activities. But this surveillance is expensive and complicated to maintain, and is very often neglected in the absence of any human cases.In many endemic countries, it is hard to obtain detailed knowledge about the status or development of natural foci. The interpretation that should be given to the sudden emergence of a case of human plague, in some places decades after the most recent outbreak, can therefore present special challenges.Surveillance of circulating strains of _Y. pestis_ has revealed no evidence of new resistance to antibiotics.The challenge in 2015 remains that of ensuring early treatment and hence diagnosis of plague, both clinically and in terms of laboratory testing. The use of rapid diagnostic tests has made laboratory confirmation much easier, but this method is still not being routinely employed. Some of the cases reported in Africa might not fit the definition of probable or confirmed cases, but the information that would enable us to make a determination is not available.Moreover, given that total incidence does not exceed a few hundred cases and as the endemic areas are highly localized, minor changes in surveillance in a particular administrative region or even in a particular health district can significantly affect national and even global data.Annual variations in incidence should be treated with caution.To what extent is the reported global incidence a reflection of the actual plague situation?----------------------------------------------------------------------A number of countries have demonstrated their capacity to detect and confirm isolated and completely unexpected cases following decades of epidemiological silence (Kyrgyzstan in 2013 and the Russian Federation in 2014). It is not unlikely that some cases escape surveillance, particularly in Africa and South America. Yet it is scarcely probable that these cases would have a significant impact on the rate of global incidence: human plague is still a rare and serious disease which, in its pneumonic form, triggers epidemics that make headlines because of their high case-fatality rate.The downward trend in global incidence observable in recent years therefore appears to mirror the reality. In the absence of systematic global surveillance of natural foci, it is not possible to say that this development is related to changes in the way that the microorganism is circulating in the environment. Moreover, there has been no significant improvement in prevention.The role of improved living conditions cannot be ruled out, but it could also be a natural cyclical development as already seen in the past. Whatever the explanation, the human plague burden cannot be gauged solely by the number of cases or deaths. In the past 15 years, violent epidemics of pneumonic plague and the emergence and re-emergence of the disease in urban areas have continually fuelled public anxiety and mobilized the international community.In the collective unconscious and beyond the epidemiological reality, plague is still seen as a scourge of humanity in 2016.[Byline: E Bertherat]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[2015 was a ""banner year"" for _Yersinia pestis_ infections in the USA, with now 16 cases and 4 deaths. In recent decades, an average of 7 human plague cases have been reported each year (range: 1-17 cases per year) with 0-2 deaths. These were all the cases in 2015 reported from the Americas. - Mod.LL]
