MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:175-177 [edited]<http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6507a2>Outbreak of Foodborne Botulism Associated with Improperly Jarred Pesto -- Ohio and California, 2014--------------------------------------------------------------------------------On 28 Jul 2014, the Cincinnati Health Department was notified of suspected cases of foodborne botulism in 2 women admitted to the same hospital 12 days apart. Patient A had been treated for 12 days for suspected autoimmune disease. When patient B, the roommate of patient A, was evaluated at the same medical center for similar symptoms, it was learned that on 13 Jul 2014, patient A and patient B had shared a meal that included prepackaged pesto from a jar; clinicians suspected botulism and notified the local health department. The pesto had been purchased from company A's farm stand in San Clemente, California. Laboratory testing detected botulinum toxin type B by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in leftovers of pasta with pesto. A culture of these food samples yielded _Clostridium_ spp. that produced botulinum toxin type B; polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing also was positive for type B toxin gene. Environmental assessment of company A identified improper acidification and pressurization practices and lack of licensure to sell canned products commercially, including products in hermetically-sealed jars. On 30 Jul 2014, the vendor voluntarily recalled all jarred products, and the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) warned the public not to consume company A's jarred foods. This report describes the 2 cases and the public health investigation that traced the source of the outbreak.Patient A---------On the evening of 15 Jul 2014, patient A, an otherwise healthy woman aged 20 years, was evaluated at the emergency department (ED) of hospital A, reporting 12 hours of worsening throat pain. She received a diagnosis of pharyngitis and was discharged with a prescription for antimicrobials. The next day she returned to the same ED with worsening symptoms, including inability to swallow, double vision on lateral gaze, and decreased sensation in her right arm. She was admitted because of concern for airway compromise. She was noted to have dysarthria and nasal speech; however, a motor examination of the arms and legs was normal. A neurologist described these clinical findings as consistent with myasthenia gravis or Miller Fisher syndrome, a rare, acquired nerve disease that is considered to be a variant of Guillain-Barre syndrome. Neostigmine challenge and acetylcholine receptor antibody test were not consistent with myasthenia gravis. Cerebrospinal fluid analyses and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain were unremarkable.On 19 Jul 2014, patient A was transferred to the neurologic intensive care unit (ICU) of facility B with worsening bulbar symptoms, where she was intubated for impending respiratory failure and treated with 5 days of intravenous immunoglobulin. On 27 Jul 2014, a physician suspected botulism as the likely diagnosis after learning that patient A had shared a meal with patient B, who had recently been admitted for neurologic dysfunction. A 30 Jul 2014 nerve conduction study and electromyogram demonstrated a presynaptic defect in neuromuscular junction function, suggestive of botulism. Patient A was not treated with botulinum antitoxin because 17 days had elapsed since exposure and there was evidence of clinical improvement. She was transferred to a long-term acute care facility on August 1 and discharged home 22 days later.Patient B---------On the evening of 16 Jul 2014, patient B, an otherwise healthy woman aged 22 years, was evaluated at facility A's ED for a sore throat. She made 3 additional ED visits to a different health care facility (facility C) on 18, 19, and 23 Jul 2014, reporting difficult and painful swallowing, nausea, abdominal pain, and dehydration. Over the course of these visits, she received a prescription for amoxicillin, an injection of penicillin, and oral corticosteroids for presumed tonsillitis. On 27 Jul 2014, patient B went to the ED of facility B with difficulty speaking, progressive weakness, and shortness of breath. Later that day, she developed upper extremity weakness, ptosis, diplopia, and hoarse voice and was admitted to the neurologic ICU and intubated. Botulism was suspected after the link to patient A was identified, and botulinum antitoxin was administered to patient B on the evening of 28 Jul 2014. Patient B was transferred to a long-term acute care facility on 6 Aug 2014, and discharged home 9 days later.Clinical specimens from the 2 patients were sent to the Ohio Department of Health Laboratory (ODHL) for _Clostridium botulinum_ testing by culture and mouse bioassay. All clinical specimens were collected 12 days or more after the shared meal, and tests were negative (Table [for Table, see source URL - Mod.LL]).Public Health Investigation---------------------------After being notified of the possible botulism cases, Cincinnati Health Department epidemiologists interviewed the 2 patients and their families. The 2 patients reported sharing a meal of baked chicken breasts, boiled pasta, steamed vegetables, and company A Pine Nut Basil Pesto on 13 Jul 2014 at approximately 8:30 pm. The pesto was poured over the chicken and pasta from an unopened glass jar and consumed by both patients without further heating. On 28 Jul 2014, investigators collected leftovers from this shared meal and 2 unopened jars of company A pesto and sent them to ODHL for testing. The pesto jar from the 13 Jul 2014 shared meal had been discarded. Botulinum toxin type B was detected in leftovers of pasta and pesto by ELISA. A culture of these food samples yielded _Clostridium_ spp. that produced botulinum toxin type B, and PCR detected DNA encoding for type B toxin (Table).Patient A received the pesto from a family member who had purchased several jars in May 2014 at a farm stand in San Clemente, California. Health officials in California collected and analyzed an unopened jar of the pesto from this family member's house. It was found to have a pH of 5.3 and water activity* of 0.965 (parameters insufficient to prevent growth of _C. botulinum_). Several jars also had been sent to family members in Colorado; one jar was collected and tested negative for botulinum toxin-producing _Clostridium_ spp. and botulinum toxin at ODHL. 7 persons in Colorado reported that they ate company A pesto on May 29, and no illnesses were reported.On 29 Jul 2014, CDPH began an investigation and discovered multiple jarred food items, including the Pine Nut Basil Pesto, available for sale on company A's website and farm stand. Neither company A nor the pesto manufacturer had permits or registrations allowing them to legally manufacture or sell canned food, including food in jars, in California. CDPH investigators identified a lack of knowledge of safety issues involved with jarring foods and inadequate acidification and pressurization practices. There were no records indicating that critical factors (e.g., pH, time, and temperature) were monitored during production. Invoices showed at least 39 jars of pesto were produced in 2014. After discussing the link between the cases in Ohio and company A pesto, company A voluntarily recalled all jarred food products. On 30 Jul 2014, CDPH posted Internet and social media notices warning consumers not to eat company A's jarred foods.Discussion----------This is the 1st reported botulism outbreak linked to pesto in the USA and the 1st reported worldwide in more than 15 years. A 1997 report described 2 botulism cases in Italy caused by home-canned pesto, also contaminated with botulinum toxin type B (1). Similar to this outbreak, both patients in Italy delayed seeking medical care until greater than or equal to 6 days after exposure.The clinical diagnosis of botulism can be difficult. In the outbreak described here, both patients sought medical care multiple times before receiving a diagnosis of botulism, and patient A was hospitalized for nearly 2 weeks before a clinician made the epidemiologic link between patient A and patient B. If not for this clinician, the diagnoses might never have been made. In a 1995 outbreak of type B botulism linked to commercial chopped garlic in oil, a food vehicle similar to pesto, 36 previously unrecognized cases of botulism were identified only after 2 sisters with neurologic symptoms were evaluated (2).Clinicians should maintain a high index of suspicion for botulism when evaluating patients with clinically compatible signs and symptoms. Throat pain, although not a classic feature of botulism, has been previously reported, having been attributed to severe dry mouth and throat caused by autonomic dysfunction (3). The classical presentation of botulism involves symmetric cranial nerve palsies, typically involving ptosis, blurry vision, dysphagia, and dysarthria, which is sometimes followed by symmetric descending flaccid paralysis, usually in the absence of sensory symptoms (3). Clinicians who suspect botulism should immediately call their state health department's emergency 24-hour telephone number. State health departments should call the CDC Emergency Operations Center (770-488-7100) to arrange for rapid clinical consultation, and release of botulism antitoxin if indicated (4).Consumer demand for fresh, farm-to-table foods has increased substantially during the past 15 years; for example, the number of farmers' markets in the USA nearly tripled from 2863 in 2000 to 8476 in 2015 (5). Consumers at farm stands and markets should be aware of the risk from improperly canned foods, including those in jars, produced without licensure and oversight from regulatory bodies. High-risk foods include low-acid canned foods (e.g., beans and peas) (6).References----------1. Chiorboli E, Fortina G, Bona G: Flaccid paralysis caused by botulinum toxin type B after pesto ingestion. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1997;16: 725-6. 2. St Louis ME, Peck SHS, Bowering D, et al: Botulism from chopped garlic: delayed recognition of a major outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1988;108: 363-8. 3. Sobel J: Botulism. Clin Infect Dis 2005;41:1167-73. 4. CDC: Notice to readers: new telephone number to report botulism cases and request antitoxin. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;52:774.5. Economic Research Service: Number of U.S. farmers markets has nearly tripled over the last 15 years. Washington, DC: US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service; 2015. <http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/chart-gallery/detail.aspx?chartId=53464>6. Peck MW: Clostridium botulinum and the safety of minimally heated, chilled foods: an emerging issue? J Appl Microbiol 2006;101:556-70. * Water activity is the amount of moisture that is available for bacterial growth. Water activity of greater than 0.85, in the absence of other controls, can allow growth of _C. botulinum_ in a shelf-stable food product. [Authors: Burke P, Needham M, Jackson BR, Bokanyi R, St. Germain E, Englender SJ]--Communicated by: ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[When the motor neuron action potential depolarizes the axon terminal, acetylcholine is released from the cytosol into the synaptic cleft. Botulism occurs when usually preformed toxin is absorbed through the intestinal tract and when the botulinum toxin is exposed to the neuromuscular junction, the heavy chain of the botulinum neurotoxin binds to glycoprotein structures specifically found on cholinergic nerve terminals. This specific docking is the reason for BT high selectivity for cholinergic synapses. After internalization, the light chain of the botulinum neurotoxin binds with high specificity to the SNARE protein complex. The target proteins vary among the BT serotypes. BT-A cleaves synaptosomal-associated proteins of 25kDa (SNAP-25). BT-B cleaves vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP), also known as synaptobrevin II.An October 2013 article in PLoS Pathogens (1) found that several auxiliary proteins produced by the organism bound to botulinum toxin A and facilitated its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract via multivalent interactions with carbohydrate receptors on intestinal epithelial cells. Indeed, in mice it seemed possible to block the neuromuscular effects of botulinum toxin by blocking absorption using a non-metabolizable galactose analog called isopropyl beta-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside and prolonged median survival time. The same group more recently, in June 2014, published (2) that the same hemagglutinin complex of the progenitor toxin complex bound to E-cadherin, a cell adhesion molecule, as well as carbohydrate binding and facilitated paracellular absorption of the toxin complex. Abolishing either the E-cadherin or carbohydrate binding of the toxin complex drastically reduced oral toxicity.References----------1. Lee K, Gu S, Jin L, et al: Structure of a bimodular botulinum neurotoxin complex provides insights into its oral toxicity. PLoS Pathog 2013; 9 (10):e1003690. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003690; available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3795040/>.2. Lee K, Gu S, Zhong X, Gu S, et al: Molecular basis for disruption of E-cadherin adhesion by botulinum neurotoxin A complex. Science 2014;344:1405-1410; abstract available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24948737>.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
