Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/nigeria-abuja-outbreak-due-to-clostridium-perfringens-13-dead-according-to-reports-18763/>Earlier this week, health officials in Abuja, Nigeria suspected that a ""mystery outbreak"" that killed some 13 people may have been due to dysentery or typhoid in Saburi [Abuja] community.However, on Fri 27 Feb 2016, Dr Rilwanu Muhammad, the Executive Secretary, FCT [Federal Capital Territory] Primary Health Care Development Board, said that 13 people died, while 10 people survived food poisoning caused by _Clostridium perfringens_ in Abuja. _C. perfringens_ is a bacterium which exists as a spore in the soil and contaminates food and the intestinal tract of human beings.The board took blood samples from infected persons and water from the well and the 3 bore holes in the community for clinical diagnosis at the laboratory of Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC). Muhammad called on community administration to provide safe and clean water for the community. He also called on the community to enhance personal hygiene, especially hand washing, adding that _C. perfringens_ infection could be traced in the stool of the affected person.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED would like more information about this outbreak because, as stated below, fatalities from _C. perfringens food poisoning are rare, so 13 deaths out of 23 total individuals (case fatality rate 56 percent) is quite unusual for this toxin-mediated illness.Spores of the organism are ubiquitous in the environment and are not generally spread from person-to-person. Prevention relates to appropriate cooking, food storage, and kitchen hygiene. While _C. perfringens_ toxin could have played a role in the illness, it is not at all likely to have been the cause of all the deaths, if any of them.Unlike staphylococcal foodborne illness, in which the preformed toxin is ingested, in _C. perfringens_ disease, the enterotoxin is formed _in situ_ in the gastrointestinal tract. The following discussion is obtained from the FDA Bad Bug Book <http://www.fda.gov/food/foodborneillnesscontaminants/causesofillnessbadbugbook/ucm070483.htm>:1. Name of the Organism:_Clostridium perfringens_ is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming rod. It is widely distributed in the environment and frequently occurs in the intestines of humans and many domestic and feral animals. Spores of the organism persist in soil, sediments, and areas subject to human or animal fecal pollution.2. Nature of Acute Disease:Perfringens food poisoning is the term used to describe the common foodborne illness caused by _C. perfringens_. A more serious but rare illness is also caused by ingesting food contaminated with Type C strains. The latter illness is known as enteritis necroticans or pig-bel disease.3. Nature of Disease:The common form of perfringens poisoning is characterized by intense abdominal cramps and diarrhea which begin 8-22 hours after consumption of foods containing large numbers of those _C. perfringens_ bacteria capable of producing the food poisoning toxin. The illness is usually over within 24 hours, but less severe symptoms may persist in some individuals for 1-2 weeks. A few deaths have been reported as a result of dehydration and other complications.Necrotic enteritis (pig-bel) caused by _C. perfringens_ is often fatal. This disease also begins as a result of ingesting large numbers of the causative bacteria in contaminated foods. Deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA.Infective dose: The symptoms are caused by ingestion of large numbers (more than 100 000 000) vegetative cells. Toxin production in the digestive tract (or in test tubes) is associated with sporulation. This disease is a food infection; only one episode has ever implied the possibility of intoxication (i.e., disease from preformed toxin).4. Diagnosis of Human Illness:Perfringens poisoning is diagnosed by its symptoms and the typical delayed onset of illness. Diagnosis is confirmed by detecting the toxin in the feces of patients. Bacteriological confirmation can also be done by finding exceptionally large numbers of the causative bacteria in implicated foods or in the feces of patients.5. Associated Foods:In most instances, the actual cause of poisoning by _C. perfringens_ is temperature abuse of prepared foods. Small numbers of the organisms are often present after cooking and multiply to food poisoning levels during cool down and storage of prepared foods. Meats, meat products, and gravy are the foods most frequently implicated.6. Relative Frequency of Disease:Perfringens poisoning is among the most commonly reported foodborne illnesses in the USA. There were 1162 cases in 1981, in 28 separate outbreaks. At least 10-20 outbreaks have been reported annually in the USA for the past 2 decades. Typically, dozens or even hundreds of persons are affected. It is probable that many outbreaks go unreported because the implicated foods or patient feces are not tested routinely for _C. perfringens_ or its toxin. CDC estimates that about 10 000 actual cases occur annually in the USA.7. Course of Disease and Complications:The disease generally lasts 24 hours. In the elderly or infirm, symptoms may last 1-2 weeks. Complications and/or death only very rarely occur.8. Target Populations:Institutional feeding (such as school cafeterias, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, etc.) where large quantities of food are prepared several hours before serving is the most common circumstance in which perfringens poisoning occurs. The young and elderly are the most frequent victims of perfringens poisoning. Except in the case of pig-bel syndrome, complications are few in persons under 30 years of age. Elderly persons are more likely to experience prolonged or severe symptoms.9. Food Analysis:Standard bacteriological culturing procedures are used to detect the organism in implicated foods and in feces of patients. Serological assays are used for detecting enterotoxin in the feces of patients and for testing the ability of strains to produce toxin. The procedures take 1-3 days."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/24993>.]
