Medical Daily [edited]<http://www.medicaldaily.com/poison-control-hand-sanitizer-sweden-375564>With laws prohibiting minors from legally purchasing alcoholic beverages, many teens are finding creative ways to get a buzz from products they can find right at home. In fact, since 2010, US poison control centers have seen a nearly 4-fold increase in calls related to minors ingesting hand sanitizer as a way to get drunk. And according to Vice [channel], this may be an even bigger problem in Sweden.Vice reported that this disturbing trend has forced Swedish pharmacists to remove hand sanitizers from store shelves and ""restrict it to behind-the-counter sales."" Apparently, police officers first asked pharmacists in the Varmland region to do so after they noticed an uptick in teens getting sick from alcohol-based products. Several emergency calls made on New Years Eve [31 Dec 2016] involved people under the age of 20 -- the legal age to purchase alcohol in Sweden -- who said that they had drunk ""alcogels,"" a police spokesman told The Local.However, Vice anticipates it's going to be difficult for pharmacists to gauge whether or not customers purchasing hand sanitizers from behind the counter are using it to clean their hands or for recreational purposes, especially now that it's cold and flu season -- a time when ""hand wash sales are through the roof.""The trend originated in neither the US nor Sweden but in New Zealand, with the help of social broadcasting channels like YouTube, CNN reported. Swedish police officials told public broadcaster Swedish Radio that there are videos of teens are mixing hand sanitizers with orange juice to essentially make knock-off screwdrivers [the name of an alcoholic mixed drink].It's commonly known that alcohol can kill germs, which is why it's present in many popular hygiene and cleaning products; beyond hand sanitizer, a product that contains 60 percent alcohol, it can be found in mouthwash and even Windex. Drinking just 2 to 3 squirts of the stuff can cause alcohol poisoning, according to CNN. In comparison, alcohol products intended for consumption, such as wine and beer, can contain between 5 and 12 percent alcohol. This means drinking just a small amount of hand sanitizer can result in alcohol poisoning.A serious and deadly consequence of alcohol consumption, alcohol poisoning occurs when drinkers consume large quantities of alcohol during a short period of time. While the condition can be managed with rest and hydration, severe cases of alcohol poisoning can disable ""critical areas of the brain that control breathing, heart rate and body temperature,"" resulting in coma or death, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Although alcohol poisoning deaths are more common among middle-aged adults, teens aren't as familiar with the dangerous consequences of drinking alcohol, thus they may be the most at risk.[Byline: Jaleesa Baulkman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The alcohol content of these hand sanitizers is very high in order to kill some germs.Alcohol poisoning is a serious -- and sometimes deadly -- consequence of drinking large amounts of alcohol in a short period of time. Drinking too much, too quickly can affect your breathing, heart rate, body temperature, and gag reflex and potentially lead to coma and death.Drinking even a small amount of a substance, such as hand sanitizer, that has a high percentage of alcohol can cause the same problem. Alcohol poisoning can also occur when adults or children accidentally or intentionally drink household products that contain alcohol.A person with alcohol poisoning needs immediate medical attention. If you suspect someone has alcohol poisoning, call for emergency medical help right away.Alcohol in the form of ethanol (ethyl alcohol) is found in alcoholic beverages, mouthwash, cooking extracts, some medications and certain household products. Ethyl alcohol poisoning generally results from drinking too many alcoholic beverages, especially in a short period of time.Other forms of alcohol -- including isopropyl alcohol (found in rubbing alcohol, lotions and some cleaning products) and methanol or ethylene glycol (a common ingredient in antifreeze, paints and solvents) -- can cause another type of toxic poisoning that requires emergency treatment.Alcohol poisoning signs include confusion, vomiting, seizures, slow breathing (less than 8 breaths a minute), irregular breathing (a gap of more than 10 seconds between breaths), blue-tinged skin or pale skin, low body temperature (hypothermia), passing out (unconsciousness) and can't be awakened. It's not necessary to have all these signs and symptoms before you seek help. A person who is unconscious or can't be awakened is at risk of dying.Alcohol poisoning treatment usually involves supportive care while your body rids itself of the alcohol, assuming that help is received promptly. Other measures may be necessary if the person's breathing or heart has stopped. Treatment administered early on typically includes careful monitoring, prevention of breathing or choking problems, oxygen therapy, fluids given through a vein (intravenously) to prevent dehydration, use of vitamins, and glucose to help prevent serious complications of alcohol poisoning.Sadly this use of alternative methods to obtain an inebriated 'high' is reminiscent of the prohibition times in the United States.Portions of this comment extracted from:<http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/alcohol-poisoning/basics/definition/con-20029020>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>, <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/108>.]
