Yakima (WA) Herald [edited]<http://www.yakimaherald.com/news/state_news/botulism-confirmed-in-two-grant-county-deaths/article_cb502caa-dfbe-11e5-b4f5-dfa8ef1ff6bd.html>[Washington state] health officials have confirmed that botulism toxin was the cause of death of 2 elderly Grant County residents in early February 2016.Confirmation came from the state Public Health Laboratory, according to a press release from the Grant County Health District. Lab officials tested blood from the deceased persons, officials said. Officials said 2 weeks ago that they suspected the deaths were from botulism.""This information was sufficient to confirm the disease in both cases because they are from the same household with similar classic botulism symptoms,"" the press release said. ""The specific food source has not been confirmed but home-canned or prepared food continues to be suspected as the most likely source.""Health district officials worked with the family to find and destroy any unopened home-canned food found in the residence, officials said. It is not believed that any of the home-canned food was shared with other households. No other cases of botulism have been reported.""This tragic event is a reminder to all of us about proper food preparation and canning,"" said Todd Phillips, environmental health manager at the Health District.Botulism is rare in Washington State and in Grant County and can occur in any age group. The last case in Grant County was in 2002 and was linked to home-canned green beans. The patient survived. The chance of surviving botulism poisoning depends on the individual's health condition, timely medical care and administration of proper antitoxin. According to CDC, over the past 50 years mortality from botulism has decreased from 50 percent to 3 to 5 percent. As in most cases of food-related poisoning, cases of botulism are largely preventable by proper food preparation and canning. Residents are reminded to review the most current information about home-canning methods prior to each canning event.Home-canned foods could be contaminated but look, smell, and taste normal, Health District officials said. If there is any doubt about whether safe canning guidelines have been followed, do not eat the food. Home-canned food might be contaminated if:- the container is leaking, bulging, or swollen;- the container looks damaged, cracked, or abnormal;- the container spurts liquid or foam when opened;- the food is discolored, moldy, or smells bad;[Byline: Jefferson Robbins]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[When the motor neuron action potential depolarizes the axon terminal, acetylcholine is released from the cytosol into the synaptic cleft. Botulism occurs when usually preformed toxin is absorbed through the intestinal tract and when the botulinum toxin is exposed to the neuromuscular junction, the heavy chain of the botulinum neurotoxin binds to glycoprotein structures specifically found on cholinergic nerve terminals. This specific docking is the reason for BT [botulinum toxin] high selectivity for cholinergic synapses. After internalization, the light chain of the botulinum neurotoxin binds with high specificity to the SNARE [soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor activating protein receptor] protein complex. The target proteins vary among the BT serotypes. BT-A cleaves synaptosomal-associated proteins of 25kDa (SNAP-25). BT-B cleaves vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP), also known as synaptobrevin II.An October 2013 article in PLoS Pathogens (1) found that several auxiliary proteins produced by the organism bound to botulinum toxin A and facilitated its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract via multivalent interactions with carbohydrate receptors on intestinal epithelial cells. Indeed, in mice it seemed possible to block the neuromuscular effects of botulinum toxin by blocking absorption using a non-metabolizable galactose analog called isopropyl beta-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside and prolonged median survival time. The same group more recently, in June 2014, published (2) that the same hemagglutinin complex of the progenitor toxin complex bound to E-cadherin, a cell adhesion molecule, as well as carbohydrate binding and facilitated paracellular absorption of the toxin complex. Abolishing either the E-cadherin or carbohydrate binding of the toxin complex drastically reduced oral toxicity.References----------1. Lee K, Gu S, Jin L, et al: Structure of a bimodular botulinum neurotoxin complex provides insights into its oral toxicity. PLoS Pathog 2013; 9(10): e1003690; available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3795040/>.2. Lee K, Gu S, Zhong X, Gu S, et al: Molecular basis for disruption of E-cadherin adhesion by botulinum neurotoxin A complex. Science 2014; 344(6190): 1405-10; abstract available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24948737>.- Mod.LLThe state of Washington can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/642>. Grant County can be seen on the map at <http://geology.com/county-map/washington-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
