Surrey Mirror [edited]<http://www.surreymirror.co.uk/8203-Surrey-red-alert-spike-Scarlet-Fever-cases/story-28845705-detail/story.html> A total of 15 people in the borough [in Surrey county, England] have contracted the highly infectious scarlet fever illness since the beginning of the year [2016], with more cases likely to rise as the seasons change. In February [2016] a staggering 7 cases were reported in the borough in just one week. Scarlet fever, which is so named because of the red rash which appears on the person's face, legs, arm and chest, is a bacterial infection, which affects mostly children. Since the beginning of the year, there have been 15 reported cases of the illness in Reigate and Banstead, and a handful in Tandridge and Mole Valley district councils. Public Health England (PHE), which collates all notifications of infections and diseases, said there had been a significant increase in scarlet fever cases over the last 2 years, and this year was looking as though it may also be unusually high. Dr Theresa Lamagni, PHE's head of streptococcal infection surveillance said: ""We can expect to see increasing numbers of cases of scarlet fever as the season progresses over the course of the winter and spring. Given the high number of patients reported to have scarlet fever last season, we are keeping a very close eye on national and local notifications."" PHE said so far this season, 2155 scarlet fever reports have been made across England since the 2nd week of September [2015] with around 250 cases of scarlet fever currently being notified each week across the country. The illness usually reaches its highest levels in March and April. Outbreaks often occur in nurseries and schools where children are in close contact with one another. The symptoms of scarlet fever will only develop in people susceptible to toxins produced by the streptococcus bacteria. Most children over 10 years of age will have developed immunity to these toxins. It's possible to catch scarlet fever more than once, but this is rare. Scarlet fever used to be a very serious illness, but nowadays most cases tend to be mild. It can easily be treated with antibiotics. Liquid antibiotics, such as penicillin or amoxicillin, are often used to treat children. These must be taken for 10 days, even though most people recover after 4 to 5 days. It's important to be aware that your child will still be infectious for 24 hours after antibiotic treatment has begun, and therefore they shouldn't attend nursery or school during this period. Without antibiotic treatment, your child will be infectious for 1-2 weeks after symptoms appear. With the right treatment, further problems are unlikely. However, there's a small risk of the infection spreading to other parts of the body and causing more serious infections, such as an ear infection, sinusitis or pneumonia. There's currently no vaccine for scarlet fever. Children and adults should cover their mouth and nose with a tissue when they cough or sneeze and wash their hands with soap and water after using or disposing of tissues. Avoid sharing contaminated utensils, cups and glasses, clothes, baths, bed linen or towels. Scarlet fever is also sometimes known as scarlatina, although this often refers to a milder form of the illness.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Surrey is a county in the southeast of England, bordering Greater London, and is divided into 11 districts; Reigate and Banstead, Tandridge, and Mole Valley are local government districts in Surrey (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surrey>). For a discussion of scarlet fever, see my moderator comments in prior ProMED-mail posts below. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1203>.]
