CTV News [edited]<http://www.ctvnews.ca/health/cholera-quietly-still-kills-dozens-a-month-in-haiti-1.2801832>More than a dozen people reclined on cots inside the clinic in the Haitian capital [Port-au-Prince], a few so sick they were receiving intravenous infusions to rehydrate their bodies and spare them an agonizing death. The worst off one recent morning was a thin and spectral man, weak from the vomiting and diarrhea caused by cholera. But all were expected to survive. The disease spread by contaminated water is easily treatable but can lead to death within hours if unattended. ""However I got it, I really hope I never get this sick again,"" a patient said as he recovered inside an immaculately clean and orderly treatment centre in downtown Port-au-Prince run by Gheskio Centers, a Haitian medical organization. He and his fellow patients were relatively lucky, getting sick close to the country's 1st permanent cholera treatment centre. Many others are not as fortunate as Haiti continues to wrestle with the worst outbreak of the disease in recent history.Cholera, which arrived in Haiti in October 2010, has sickened more than 770 000 people, or about 7 percent of the population, and killed more than 9200. So far in 2016, it has sickened more than 6000 and is killing an average of 37 people a month, according to the latest government figures. The persistence of the preventable disease has alarmed public health experts who fear that attention and resources have been diverted by newer challenges, including the regional spread of the Zika virus and the political crisis that recently halted Haiti's elections.WHO spokesman Gregory Hartl said cholera is now considered ""endemic"" in Haiti, meaning it's an illness that occurs regularly. Others have noted the cholera bacterium could very well be firmly established in Haiti's rivers, estuaries and even coastal waters. ""Once it is established in a country's aquatic reservoir it is extremely difficult to eradicate,"" said Afsar Ali, a researcher at the University of Florida who has led studies of cholera in Haiti for years.Dr. Joseph Donald Francois, who co-ordinates the health ministry's efforts to combat the illness, still believes Haiti, with international help, can eliminate cholera by 2022. But he acknowledged the effort is badly underfinanced. Only USD 307 million, or less than 14 percent, has been funded of a USD 2.2 billion plan announced in 2013 to eradicate cholera from the island shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic over a decade, according to a November [2015] report from the UN. In the 1st year of the outbreak, more than 200 international organizations were providing money and expertise to combat the illness in Haiti. Now, there are fewer than a dozen, Francois said. ""Having far fewer deaths has led a lot of people to believe the situation is no longer urgent,"" Francois said. ""But if we had the resources, people wouldn't be dying at all.""Cholera was 1st detected in central Haiti's Artibonite Valley. Researchers say there is ample evidence the disease was introduced to the country's biggest river by inadequately treated sewage from a base of UN peacekeepers from Nepal, one of the units that have rotated in and out of a multinational force in Haiti since 2004.New research published this month [March 2016] by the CDC suggests cholera's death toll in Haiti could have been significantly higher due to inadequate reporting early in the outbreak. While the number of cholera cases has been significantly reduced from its 1st wave and the mortality rate has been slashed to lower than 1 percent from a high of 9 percent in December 2010, the fact that cholera is still killing Haitians more than 5 years on is galling to public health experts. ""We need to raise our expectations of what's possible to do in Haiti and other countries in terms of these diseases that we've completely eliminated from our own societies,"" said Dr. Louise Ivers, a senior policy adviser with Boston-based Partners In Health. Ivers was working in Haiti's central plateau when cholera started sickening and killing so many people that it gave the nation the globe's highest rate of cholera a year after it was introduced. She said there hasn't been nearly enough progress addressing the lack of sanitation and access to clean water that are key to eliminating cholera and believes progress has stalled.Only 24 per cent of Haitians have access to a toilet, sewage is rarely treated and safe water remains inaccessible to many.[Byline: David McFadden]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[With about 7 percent of the Haitian population reported to have been stricken with _Vibrio cholerae_, if we take an estimate of only 1 in 10 infections being symptomatic (the range is 1 in 3 to 1 in 100), 70 percent of the population have already been infected. This outbreak is a prime example of what occurs when an enteric pathogen is introduced into a country with woefully inadequate sanitation made disastrously worse by an earthquake. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/25>.]
