Ithaca Voice [edited]<http://ithacavoice.com/2016/03/more-lead-test-positives-for-ithaca-schools-district-questions-results/>The results of more lead testing in Ithaca [New York state] district schools have turned up positive results. Meanwhile, the school district and Tompkins [County] Health Department are calling some previous results into question.On Thursday [3 Mar 2016], ICSD [Ithaca City School District] posted the results of lead testing performed on 10 different schools in the district: Northeast Elementary, Fall Creek Elementary, DeWitt Middle School, South Hill, Lehman Alternative, Ithaca High School, Belle Sherman and its annex, Beverly J. Martin Elementary, Boynton Middle School and Cayuga Heights.Five water samples were taken from each school, except for Belle Sherman, which had 5 samples from its annex and 3 from the school.28 samples out of the 53 tested returned results above the 15 parts per billion (ppb) action level recommended by the Environmental Protection Agency. 11 of those results were over 100 ppb, with some being 400 ppb or higher.Under EPA policy, action is required if the 90th percentile of the samples tested exceed the 15 ppb action level. This was the case for every school on the list.Some samples also tested positive for copper contamination, though only in Boynton and South Hill did the 90th percentile value exceed the action level.However, the Tompkins County Health Department and, by extension, the school district, are questioning the validity of some previous testing results from Caroline school -- which had one faucet that reported toxic waste levels of lead contamination.A letter from Elizabeth Cameron, Director of Environment Health, expresses concern over the way the testing was handled.In her letter, Cameron notes that the testers shut off the water system in Caroline the night before the test. She calls this is a ""significant departure"" from the usual testing procedures. She also notes that there was a leak in the Caroline water system that may have depressurized the system.The same testing procedures were also used in Enfield [school].""Both shutting off the water system and the reported depressurizing of the Caroline Elementary School water system may have created disruptive, turbulent or scouring conditions in the water pipes, potentially releasing lead-containing particles into the distribution system,"" Cameron said.Cameron says that after consulting with the New York State Department of Health, the Tompkins Health Department is concerned that the results ""may not be representative of actual conditions.""In a separate letter, ICSD Superintendent Dr. Luvelle Brown echoed that idea, adding, ""The Tompkins County Health Department has advised that we retest at Caroline and Enfield elementary the week of 7 Mar 2016. A plan is being developed to retest all other buildings.""""Along with proper testing practices, investigation must be conducted to determine whether any remediation efforts are needed to produce compliant and safe water systems throughout our school district,"" writes Brown.Brown also wrote that the district has been in contact with EPA officials. Senator Chuck Schumer announced on Thursday that the EPA had agreed to aid ICSD with the lead issue.[Byline: Michael Smith]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The situation with the Ithaca schools and lead in the water is not new. It has been brewing for a little while, as evidenced by an investigation and article on 26 Feb 2016: <http://www.ithacajournal.com/story/news/local/2016/02/26/schumer-calls-epa-investigation-water/80998150/>.So this appears to be at least a 2nd round of testing and it appears that additional rounds of testing are planned.CDC determined that lead concentrations in drinking water should be below the EPA action level of 15 parts per billion; because no safe blood level has been identified for young children, all sources of lead exposure for children should be controlled or eliminated (<http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/tips/water.htm>).Lead is a metal that occurs naturally in the earth's crust, but human activity -- mining, burning fossil fuels, and manufacturing -- has caused it to become more widespread. Lead was also once a key ingredient in paint and gasoline and is still used in batteries, solder, pipes, pottery, roofing materials, and some cosmetics.Lead poisoning occurs when lead builds up in the body, often over a period of months or years. Even small amounts of lead can cause serious health problems. Children under the age of 6 are especially vulnerable to lead poisoning, which can severely affect mental and physical development. At very high levels, lead poisoning can be fatal.There is a long list of ways to encounter lead:- Houses painted before 1978. Even if the paint is not peeling, it can be a problem. Lead paint is very dangerous when it is being stripped or sanded. These actions release fine lead dust into the air. Infants and children living in pre-1960's housing (when paint often contained lead) have the highest risk of lead poisoning. Small children often swallow paint chips or dust from lead-based paint.- Toys and furniture painted before 1976.- Painted toys and decorations made outside the US.- Lead bullets, fishing sinkers, curtain weights.- Plumbing, pipes, and faucets. Lead can be found in drinking water in homes containing pipes that were connected with lead solder. Although new building codes require lead-free solder, lead is still found in some modern faucets.- Soil contaminated by decades of car exhaust or years of house paint scrapings. Lead is more common in soil near highways and houses.- Hobbies involving soldering, stained glass, jewelry making, pottery glazing, and miniature lead figures (always look at labels).- Children's paint sets and art supplies (always look at labels).- Pewter pitchers and dinnerware.- Storage batteries.Children get lead in their bodies when they put lead objects in their mouths, especially if they swallow those objects. They can also get lead poison on their fingers from touching a dusty or peeling lead object, and then putting their fingers in their mouths or eating food afterwards. Children also can breathe in tiny amounts of lead.Symptoms--------There are many possible symptoms of lead poisoning. Lead can affect many different parts of the body. A single high dose of lead can cause severe emergency symptoms.However, it is more common for lead poisoning to build up slowly over time. This occurs from repeated exposure to small amounts of lead. In this case, there may not be any obvious symptoms. Over time, even low levels of lead exposure can harm a child's mental development. The health problems get worse as the level of lead in the blood gets higher.Lead is much more harmful to children than adults because it can affect their developing nerves and brains. The younger the child, the more harmful lead can be. Unborn children are the most vulnerable.Possible complications include:- Behavior or attention problems- Failure at school- Hearing problems- Kidney damage- Reduced IQ- Slowed body growthThe symptoms of lead poisoning may include:- Abdominal pain and cramping (usually the 1st sign of a high, toxic dose of lead poison)- Aggressive behavior- Anemia- Constipation- Difficulty getting pregnant- Difficulty sleeping- Headaches- Hearing loss- Irritability- Loss of previous developmental skills (in young children)- Low appetite and energy- Reduced sensationsVery high levels of lead may cause vomiting, staggering walk, muscle weakness, seizures, or coma.Exposure to even low levels of lead can cause damage over time, especially in children. The greatest risk is to brain development, where irreversible damage may occur. Higher levels can damage the kidneys and nervous system in both children and adults. Very high lead levels may cause seizures, unconsciousness, and possibly death.People with higher lead levels have a greater risk of long-lasting health problems. They must be followed carefully. Their nerves and muscles can be greatly affected and may no longer function as well as they should. Other body systems may be harmed to various degrees, such as the kidneys and blood vessels. People who survive toxic lead levels may have some permanent brain damage. Children are more vulnerable to serious long-term problems.A complete recovery from chronic lead poisoning may take months to years (<https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/002473.htm>).Alternative names for lead poisoning are plumbism, colica pictorum, saturnism, Devon colic, or painter's colic (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lead_poisoning>).Doctors usually use a simple blood test to detect lead poisoning. A small blood sample is taken from a finger prick or from a vein. Lead levels in the blood are measured in micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL). A level of 5 mcg/dL or higher indicates your child may have unsafe levels of lead in their blood and should have their blood tested periodically. If levels become too high -- generally 45 mcg/dL or higher -- your child should be treated.The 1st step in treating all degrees of lead poisoning is to remove the source of the contamination. If you can't remove lead from your environment, you may at least be able to reduce the likelihood that it will cause problems. For instance, sometimes it's better to seal in rather than remove old lead paint. Your local health department can recommend ways to identify and reduce lead in your home and community.For children and adults with relatively low lead levels, simply avoiding exposure to lead may be enough to reduce blood lead levels.For more severe cases, your doctor may recommend:- chelation therapy. In this treatment, you take a medication that binds with the lead so that it's excreted in your urine.- EDTA therapy. Doctors treat adults with lead levels greater than 45 mcg/dL of blood with one or more of 3 drugs, most commonly a chemical called ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, or edetic acid). Depending on your lead level, you may need more than one treatment. In such severe cases, however, it may not be possible to reverse damage that has already occurred.Children may need chelation therapy at lower levels than adults do.References from the US NIH (National Institutes of Health):1. Velez LI, O'Connell EJ: Heavy metals. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014: chap 157.2. Woolf AD, Goldman R, Bellinger DC: Update on the clinical management of childhood lead poisoning. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2007; 54(2): 271-94; abstract available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17448360>.Portions of this comment were extracted from:<http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/tips/water.htm>, <https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/002473.htm>, and <http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/basics/complications/con-20035487>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/19143>.]
