Derby Telegraph [edited]<http://www.derbytelegraph.co.uk/Parents-warned-increase-Scarlet-Fever-cases/story-28860350-detail/story.html>Parents are being warned to be on the lookout for symptoms of scarlet fever as the number of reported cases in the region are among the highest in the country.Scarlet fever is a highly contagious bacteria which can spread in a number of ways and is particularly common in children under the age of 10.According to Public Health England the population rates of notified scarlet fever cases so far this season were highest in the East Midlands, at 15.1 per 100 000 population, followed by Yorkshire and Humber with 12.3 per 100 000.The illness -- which is common in March and April -- can be identified by a pink rash, sore throat, fever and headaches. It was around the same time in 2015 that there was a spike in scarlet fever cases in the UK. The infection, which commonly affects young children, generally responds to a course of antibiotics and clears up within a week -- but may lead to complications if left untreated.Dr John Grenville, of Derbyshire's Local Medical Committee, said: ""Last year there was a high increase in cases of scarlet fever and we would expect that again this year. We don't really know why this illness which was has been relatively dormant has reared itself again in the past few years. But it is usually this time of year when we can expect cases of it and this could be down to the cold weather and climate changes at this time."" Dr Grenville urged parents to be aware of the symptoms of the illness and said if they have any concerns they should contact their GP or seek advice on the 101 health number. He said: ""Parents should be aware if their child becomes ill, has a high fever, behavioural changes and consciousness changes to seek advice.""Dr Theresa Lamagni, head of streptococcal infection surveillance at Public Health England, said: ""Individuals who think they or their child may have scarlet fever should see their GP without delay as antibiotic treatment is needed. As scarlet fever is highly contagious, children or adults diagnosed with it are advised to stay at home until at least 24 hours after the start of antibiotic treatment to avoid passing on the infection.""The illness can be caught by breathing in the same air as someone who has the bacteria or by coming into direct contact with an infected patient. To avoid getting the illness experts advise good hand hygiene after using the toilet, before preparing food and before eating food.[Byline: Cheryl Hague]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The East Midlands, one of 9 official regions of England, is located in central England, bounded by the following regions: on the north by the Yorkshire and the Humber, on the west by West Midlands, and on the south by the Southeast and East of England. Maps of England showing the regions of England can be found at <http://resources.woodlands-junior.kent.sch.uk/customs/questions/regions/>. For a discussion of scarlet fever, see my moderator comments in prior ProMED-mail posts below. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/279>.]
