Malaysian Digest [edited]<http://malaysiandigest.com/frontpage/282-main-tile/598562-batu-gajah-food-poisoning-four-critical-37-warded.html>A total of 37 people, aged between 2 to 71 years old, were admitted with 4 in a critical situation following a food poisoning incident in Batu Gajah, Perak.State Health, Public Transport, Non-Muslim Affairs, National Integration and New Village Committee chairman Datuk Dr Mah Hang Soon said they have been sent to the Raja Permaisuri Bainun Hospital, KPJ Ipoh and Batu Gajah Hospital.He said early investigation revealed that the victims had eaten food contaminated with insecticide (organophosphate) at a food stall.He said the stall operating at Siputeh has been ordered to close operation and added that various agencies are investigating the cause of the incident.Meanwhile, Dr Mah also called on the public not to panic as the state authorities have taken safety precaution over the matter.He said 24 out of the 37 patients were allowed to return home at 5pm on Friday [4 Mar 2016] while the rest have been ordered to undergo health tests today [5 Mar 2016].[Byline: Astro Awani]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is unclear how the chemical, believed to be an organophosphate, was in the food. Perhaps it was on vegetables where the chemical could have been used as an insecticide. Or was this chemical added to a dish as a mistaken seasoning?Organophosphates are a group of human-made chemicals that poison insects and mammals. Organophosphates are the most widely used insecticides today. They are used in agriculture, the home, gardens, and veterinary practice.- Because organophosphates are often sprayed on crops and plants, small particles of the chemical may be carried away from the field or yard before falling to the ground.- After organophosphates are applied, they may be present in the soil, surface waters, and on the surface of the plants. They can move through the soil and contaminate ground water.- Rain can wash organophosphates on soil and plant surfaces into surface waters.- Organophosphates are rapidly broken down into other chemicals so they do not build up in the environment.- Organophosphates are not likely to build up to high or dangerous levels in animal or plant foods that you might eat.Organophosphate insecticides (such as diazinon) are one type of pesticide that works by damaging an enzyme in the body called acetylcholinesterase. This enzyme is critical for controlling nerve signals in the body. The damage to this enzyme kills pests and may cause unwanted side effects in exposed humans. All organophosphates have a common mechanism of toxicity and can cause similar symptoms in humans who have too much exposure.Urine samples can be analyzed for organophosphate insecticides and their breakdown products (metabolites). The metabolites are not toxic, but show that exposure to organophosphates occurred in the few days before testing. Linking some of these metabolites to a specific, original organophosphate compound is not possible without additional information. Even though an organophosphate or its metabolites in a person indicates exposure, it does not necessarily show the person will become sick.Symptoms of sudden poisoning by organophosphates start during or after exposure, depending on how the poison is contacted. Symptoms start fastest after organophosphates are breathed, and next by eating or drinking contaminated food or water or getting them on your skin. Some symptoms are headache, dizziness, weakness, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, salivation, watery eyes, and small pupils. Severe symptoms are seizures, slow pulse, difficulty breathing, and coma. Long after exposure, people also can develop nervous system problems such as muscle weakness and numbness and tingling of the hands and feet (neuropathy).Long-term exposure to organophosphates can cause confusion, anxiety, loss of memory, loss of appetite, disorientation, depression, and personality changes. Other symptoms such as weakness, headache, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting also may occur.Portions of this comment were extracted from: <http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/clusters/fallon/organophosfaq.htm>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/2293>.]
