Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/grenada-health-officials-act-on-chickenpox-outbreak-at-st-georges-anglican-junior-school-55178/>Two weeks ago, health officials in Grenada reported on a chickenpox outbreak that affected 17 students at St. George's Anglican Junior School. The school was closed for the week to monitor and treat affected students.This pustulovesicular rash represents a generalized herpes outbreak due to the Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) pathogen/CDC.Last week, the Ministry of Health screened over 400 students from the St. George's Anglican School. The exercise saw a team of qualified nursing personnel conducting screening and evaluation of students at the St. George's Anglican Junior and Senior Schools.A total of 255 and 183 students from the junior and senior schools respectively were examined on the compound as the institution reopened its doors following the completion of sanitation and cleaning operations.During the screening/examination at the school, several students with skin lesions, fever, cold, headaches and skin rashes were identified and were not given clearance for a return to the classroom. Some of the students were referred to the doctor, and others were requested to be observed at home.Meanwhile, the ministry will undertake a daily monitoring of the school, conduct education sessions with teachers and undertake another medical evaluation of students, in particular the ones that are to be observed at home and referred.Chickenpox is a common, usually benign childhood disease caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV), a member of the herpes family. This virus causes 2 distinct diseases; varicella (chickenpox) is the primary infection, and later when VSV reactivates, herpes zoster (shingles).Chickenpox is highly contagious and is spread by coughing and sneezing, by direct contact and by aerosolization of the virus from skin lesions. You can also get it by contact with the vesicle secretions from shingles.The disease is characterized by fever and a red, itchy skin rash that usually starts on the abdomen, back or face and then spreads to nearly all parts of the body. The rash begins as small red bumps that appear as pimples or insect bites. They then develop into thin-walled blisters that are filled with clear fluid which collapse on puncture. The blisters then break, crust over, and leave dry brown scabs.The chickenpox lesions may be present in several stages of maturity and are more abundant on covered skin rather than exposed. Lesions may also be found in the mouth, upper respiratory tract and genitals.Chickenpox is contagious from 1-2 days before the rash forms and continues until all the lesions are crusted over (usually about 5 days).This disease is more serious in adults than in children. Complications of chickenpox are rare, but include pneumonia, encephalitis and secondary bacterial infections.Infection with this virus usually gives lifelong immunity, although 2nd attacks have been documented in immunocompromised people. The viral infection remains latent, and disease may recur years later as shingles.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the chickenpox vaccine is the best protection against chickenpox. The vaccine is made from weakened varicella virus that produces an immune response in your body that protects you against chickenpox. The chickenpox vaccine was licensed for use in the United States in 1995.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[A map of Grenada can be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/34>. - Mod.LK]******[2] Varicella - USA (North Carolina) schoolchildren Date: Mon 7 Mar 2016Source: Charlotte Observer [edited]<http://www.charlotteobserver.com/living/health-family/article64604577.html>[A] 5-year-old doesn't have chickenpox. But 5 other elementary students in Union County do. And because [the 5-year-old] hasn't been vaccinated against the childhood illness, she is one of 15 children who have been ordered by the county health director to stay out of school, in quarantine, for 21 days.[The 5-year-old]'s mother, of Indian Trail, is confused and angry about the health department's decision. She questions why her child -- and the other healthy, unvaccinated children -- should be sent home when the vaccination didn't prevent the other children from getting sick.""There's nothing wrong with her, but she can't come back to school for 21 days,"" [she] said. ""The only ones with the virus are the ones that got the vaccination.""Hedrick said her daughter, a kindergartner at Poplin Elementary, ""can go to the public library. She can go to the grocery store. We can go out to eat. But she cannot go to school. We are not talking about Ebola. We are not talking about the plague. We are talking about chickenpox.""The 5 children with chickenpox, also called varicella, attend Poplin and Hemby Bridge elementary schools, and all had been vaccinated, said Union County Health Director Phillip Tarte.""The very nature of isolation in this instance is to remove the most vulnerable away from the disease,"" Tarte told the Observer in an email. Although the vaccine is not 100 percent effective, he said those who get the vaccine and then get chickenpox ""have a greater level of protection to avoid complications.""In justifying the quarantine, Tarte quoted the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: ""Children who lack evidence of immunity and whose parents refuse vaccination should be excluded from school from the start of the outbreak through 21 days after rash onset of the last identified case.""Unlike measles and mumps, chickenpox is not required to be reported to health officials, so there are no good statistics on the number of cases. In Mecklenburg County, Dr. Stephen Keener, the Health Department's medical director, said he hasn't had a report of chickenpox in the past year and has never ordered a quarantine of healthy children during a chickenpox outbreak.Keener did order a quarantine in late 2014 after a case of measles was reported. The quarantine orders went to a few people who had direct contact with the measles victim and who could not produce documentation of vaccination.Chickenpox, caused by the varicella-zoster virus, is highly contagious and spreads by direct contact or through the air by coughing or sneezing. It takes 10 to 21 days to develop symptoms after being exposed to someone with the disease. Recovery from chickenpox confers long lasting natural immunity.Many cases of chickenpox are mild, but deaths can occur from the disease. The vaccine was licensed for use in the United States in 1995. Before that, about 100 people died every year in the United States from the disease. The vaccine has also been linked with injuries. Since creation of the federal Vaccine Injury Compensation Program, it has received a total of 125 claims -- 9 deaths and 116 serious injuries -- related to the chickenpox vaccine. Compensation was awarded in 71 cases, and 28 were dismissed.The mother said she declined to get her daughter vaccinated against chickenpox and other childhood illnesses because her older child, now 8, had bad reactions -- from ear infections to drug-resistant pneumonia -- after receiving vaccines as a small child. ""We went through a very traumatic time with him,"" she said.{The 8-year-old] received vaccinations only until he was 2. After that, [his mother] got religious exemptions that allow both children to attend school without having received all the mandatory childhood vaccines.Keeping [the 5-year-old] at home has created challenges for the family. [the mother], who works for Wells Fargo, has arranged to work from home and help her with homework until the quarantine is over on 17 Mar 2016. She has also hired a tutor for [the child], who is in the school's Spanish immersion program. [Byline: Karen Garloch]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Chickenpox is caused by the varicella-zoster virus. Note, it is not a pox virus. The virus is an airborne pathogen that spreads easily; one can get it from an infected person who sneezes, coughs, or shares food or drinks, or if one touches the fluid from a chickenpox blister. A person who has chickenpox can spread the virus even before he or she has any symptoms. The disease is vaccine preventable, although the vaccine is 70-90% effective. Vaccinated individuals who come down with the disease are generally protected from the most severe symptoms.The vaccine was licensed in the US in 1995. Prior to that, in the early 1990s, an average of 4 million people got chickenpox; 10 500-13 000 were hospitalized (range, 8000 to 18 000), and 100 to 150 died each year.The chickenpox vaccine carries less risk of severe disease than does getting the disease, and most people who get the vaccine do not have any problems with it. Nonetheless, as stated in the report, rare side effects may occur. Serious side effects to the chickenpox vaccine are very rare and more often are evident after the 1st dose than after the 2nd one.According to the CDC, possible reactions include: soreness, redness, or swelling where the shot was given, fever, mild rash or several small bumps after vaccination, as well as seizure (jerking and staring spells) that may be caused by fever. Seizures after chickenpox vaccination may or may not be related to chickenpox vaccine.Serious side effects from chickenpox vaccine are extremely rare, but may include severe brain reactions and low blood count.The issue raised by this report, i.e., prohibiting unvaccinated healthy children from attending school following evidence of varicella cases in the school, is a difficult one and very controversial. This practice is recommended by the CDC to protect those most vulnerable. As noted from the numbers above, the vaccine -- even though not 100% effective -- apparently has greatly decreased the number of cases. The exact incidence is unknown, though, since varicella is not a reportable disease. Certainly, vaccination is the most effective protection available against serious disease. But where vaccination of schoolchildren is voluntary and not mandatory, the situation described in this report will have to be confronted every time cases occur in a classroom setting.For more information on the vaccine, see <http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/varicella/basic-side-effects.htm>, and for information on the disease, see <http://wonder.cdc.gov/wonder/prevguid/p0000108/p0000108.asp#head001000000000000>.A map of North Carolina, USA can be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/235>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
