Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/germany-reports-suspected-lassa-fever-death-in-cologne-51175/>An individual who was referred to the University Hospital of Cologne for malaria treatment has died from suspected Lassa fever, according to German media.The patient was apparently in West Africa, admitted to the Cologne hospital for malaria, later died and on [Wed 9 Mar 2016] the Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine's postmortem examination revealed the suspected diagnosis of Lassa fever. ""We then immediately informed the competent authorities, with whom we are now in close coordination"" spokesman Timo MÌ gge said.Lassa occurs in several countries in West Africa. In Germany, the disease occurs only rarely and manifests when it is introduced by travelers from Africa. According to the Robert Koch Institute (RKI), since October 2011, Germany has reported only 5 cases of the disease.Both Nigeria and Benin are experiencing current Lassa fever outbreaks.According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Lassa fever is an acute viral illness that occurs in West Africa. The virus, a member of the family _Arenaviridae_, is a single-stranded RNA virus and is zoonotic, or animal-borne.Lassa fever is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. While Lassa fever is mild or has no observable symptoms in about 80 percent of people infected with the virus, the remaining 20 percent have a severe multisystem disease.The animal host of Lassa virus is a rodent known as the ""multimammate rat"" of the genus _Mastomys_. Humans get infected with Lassa through aerosol or direct contact with excreta from the rodent. Laboratory infections do occur primarily through contaminated food materials.The symptoms of Lassa fever typically occur 1-3 weeks after the patient comes into contact with the virus. These include fever, retrosternal pain (pain behind the chest wall), sore throat, back pain, cough, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, conjunctivitis, facial swelling, proteinuria (protein in the urine), and mucosal bleeding. Neurological problems have also been described, including hearing loss, tremors, and encephalitis.The Lassa virus and was first described in 1969 in the town of Lassa, in Borno State, Nigeria.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:Sabine ZentisCastleview English LonghornsGut LaachD-52385 NideggenGermany<sabinezentis@gmail.com>[This is not the 1st instance of Lassa fever cases being imported into Germany. There were 2 cases imported from Nigeria in 2000.In a 27 May 2015 comment (ProMED-mail archive no. 20150529.3392905), Dr Nicholas Beeching of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Royal Liverpool University Hospital and NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, University of Liverpool, UK said in regard to a case in New Jersey, USA, ""The reports of a patient presenting with Lassa fever in New Jersey serves as a reminder that Lassa fever has historically been the most common viral haemorrhagic fever to be exported from West Africa, until the current Ebola virus outbreak. Including the 5 previous cases imported to the USA up to 2004, we identified 28 cases in the 4 decades 1969-2009. The majority of these came from Sierra Leone (14 cases) followed by Nigeria (11 cases), both countries known to have large numbers of cases on a regular basis. Some of these cases were evacuated from West Africa for further medical treatment and the overall mortality was 36 per cent (9/28).""None of the cases were associated with onward transmission to other patients or to fellow travellers, although delays in recognition and isolation of patients continue to occur for a variety of reasons, including failure of patients to report their travel history risks. Other causes of fever in travellers returning from West Africa are much more common, such as malaria, diarrhoeal disease and respiratory infections. However, the recent case of Lassa fever in New Jersey emphasizes the need to consider other viral haemorrhagic fevers in travellers returning from endemic areas of the world and not to focus on Ebola virus disease alone.""His comments underscore the importance of good travel histories. They are essential in order to initiate treatment as early in the course of disease as possible. Unfortunately, not all patients are forthcoming in providing that history, as in the fatal case in the USA (New Jersey) (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20150526.3386913).ProMED-mail thanks Sabine Zentis for sending in the report of this case in Germany. ProMED would be interested in learning if the case is laboratory confirmed as Lassa fever.A map of Germany is included in the report at the URL above. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/7446> - Mod.TY]
