Saudi MOH [edited]<http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2016-03-10-001.aspx>As of noon today [10 Mar 2016], there have been a total of:1335 laboratory confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including564 deaths [reported case fatality rate 42.2%]748 recoveries. and23 currently active cases.In the past 24 hours, there have been:5 newly confirmed cases,2 newly reported deaths, and1 newly reported recovery.Information on newly confirmed cases (5):1- A 29-year-old Saudi male from Buraidah, non-health care worker, reported as a fatality in the initial confirmation report. Classified as a secondary healthcare associated case in a patient.2- A 22-year-old Saudi female from Buraidah, non-healthcare worker, currently in critical condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare associated case in a patient.3- A 26-year-old Saudi male from Buraidah, healthcare worker, currently in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare associated case in a healthcare worker.4- A 62-year-old Saudi male from Jubail, non-healthcare worker, currently in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of contact with camels.5- A 75-year-old Saudi male from Taif, non-healthcare worker, currently in critical condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of contact with camels.Information on newly reported fatalities (2 fatalities):1- A 29-year-old Saudi male from Buraidah, non-healthcare worker, with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case today (10 Mar 2016 - see case No.1 above) in the initial confirmation report, was classified as a secondary healthcare associated case in a patient. - Mod.MPP]2- A 23-year-old Saudi male from Buraidah, non-healthcare worker, with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities [reported as a newly confirmed case on 5 Mar 2016, at which time was noted to be in critical condition. At the time of initial report, was under investigation for possible route of transmission but was noted not to have had contact with camels. - Mod.MPP]Information on newly reported recovery (1 recovery):- A 30-year-old Expat male from Riyadh, non-healthcare worker, no history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [There were 2 30-year-old Expat males from Riyadh reported as newly confirmed cases: one on 28 Feb 2016; the other on 29 Feb 2016. Both were classified as secondary cases, household contacts of known MERS-CoV infected individuals. With this current report, now both have been reported to have recovered. - Mod.MPP]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The nosocomial outbreak in Buraidah continues, as well as the occurrence of sporadic cases associated with contact with camels. There have now been 17 newly confirmed cases reported from Buraidah since 3 Mar 2016. The true index case of this outbreak has not been identified, as cases started occurring on an almost daily basis (3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 Mar 2016). The 1st 2 newly confirmed cases were classified as primary cases but no history of contact with camels; the next 4 cases were classified as under investigation; beginning on 7 Mar 2016, cases were classified as secondary healthcare associated cases. It would be interesting to know whether retrospective case finding among hospital patients seen in the 2 weeks prior to 3 Mar 2016 included individuals with symptoms compatible with a diagnosis of MERS-CoV infection but were either not tested for the virus or were negative on the testing performed.The 2 newly confirmed primary cases with a history of contact with camels involved an individual from Makkah province (Taif) and an individual from the Eastern Province (Jubail).A map showing the location of the newly reported cases can be found at the source URL.The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia is available at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/131>. - Mod.MPP]
