ABC News, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]<http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/chinese-man-16-years-prison-deadly-ricin-plot-37503508>A New York City student from China who prosecutors say plunged into the dark side of the Internet was sentenced [Tue Mar 2016] in prison for trying to acquire ricin so he could sell ""simple and easy death pills.""Cheng Le, 22, was sentenced in Manhattan federal court after his conviction by a Manhattan jury in August [2015] on charges he tried to acquire ricin as a weapon, postal fraud and identity theft. Ricin is a fatal toxin with no known antidote. The sentence was within the range suggested by federal sentencing guidelines.Judge Alison Nathan said the ""horrible, serious, and quite terrifying offense"" required a severe sentence, but she added that no one was harmed by the plot because Le's communications were intercepted online by investigators who found him in an area of the Internet where criminal marketplaces thrive.Among evidence introduced at trial were statements Le made in writing about getting ricin from an FBI covert employee, including: ""If you can make them into simple and easy death pills, they'd become bestsellers.""Le was arrested in December 2014 after prosecutors said he contacted an FBI covert employee online using an encrypted messaging service and asked if he sells ricin. Authorities said Le was wearing latex gloves when he went to a postal office to retrieve a fake shipment of pills.Patrick Brackley, Le's lawyer, urged leniency, citing a letter from Le's parents describing his immaturity when he came to the United States to study physics at New York University. The lawyer said Le had received offers from several Ivy League schools.Assistant US Attorney Ilan Graff called Le's crimes serious, troubling and chilling. ""The defendant sought to profit from murder,"" he said.Le said he lives with regrets. ""Not a day goes by where I don't think of all the things I could have done,"" Le said. He dabbed his eyes with tissue several times in court before he was led away in shackles.[Byline: Larry Neumeister]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Castor beans, from the Castor oil plant (_Ricinus communis_) sometimes used in traditional therapies, contain ricin, among the most toxic substances known. It may cause an acute and potentially fatal gastroenteritis in addition to neurological and ophthalmological lesions. Poisoning may also lead to delayed visceral damages; however, the latter is quite rare. The toxicity is dose related and depends on the amount of castor beans ingested. There is no specific treatment, and symptomatic management to reduce the load of the toxin needs to be initiated quickly and early when a case of poisoning is suspected, so that serious complications will be avoided. Increasing the awareness of the population to the dangers of ricin would be a way to avoid the utilisation of castor seeds in traditional therapies.Oral toxicity is generally not quite as severe as inhalation of the ricin. The beans are oblong and light brown, mottled with dark brown spots. The seed is only toxic if the outer shell is broken or chewed. The seeds of the castor bean plant may be swallowed without cracking the outer husk of the seed and pass safely through the body.It is noteworthy that the oil extracted from the bean does not contain the toxin.Ricin is a protein toxin (toxalbumin). Toxicity results from the inhibition of protein synthesis, but other mechanisms are noted including apoptosis pathways, direct cell membrane damage, alteration of membrane structure and function, and release of cytokine inflammatory mediators.The castor bean plant also contains another glycoprotein lectin, the _Ricinus communis_ agglutinin, which, unlike ricin, is not directly cytotoxic, but does have affinity for the red blood cell, leading to agglutination and subsequent haemolysis. _Ricinus communis_ agglutinin is not significantly absorbed from the gut and causes clinically significant haemolysis only after intravenous administration.Symptom onset after ingestion is usually within 4 to 6 hours but may be as late as 10 hours. Initial symptoms are nonspecific and may include colicky abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhoea, heartburn, and oropharyngeal pain.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC308774>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/37978>.]
