USA Today [edited]<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2016/03/10/lawmaker-my-raw-milk-didnt-make-colleagues-sick/81577754/>Some West Virginia lawmakers are dealing with a tough double-whammy: Not only are they recovering from a nasty flu-like illness, they're bearing the brunt of some serious Internet ridicule. A headline at Consumerist sums up why: ""WV Lawmakers Legalize Raw Milk, Drink Raw Milk, Get Mysterious Stomach Bug.""It seems that after the governor signed a law loosening restrictions on unpasteurized milk, a lawmaker brought in some from a local dairy to celebrate and handed out samples, reports the Charleston Gazette-Mail. Next thing you know, lawmakers were being felled by vomiting, fever and diarrhea. The lawmaker who brought in the milk, Scott Cadle, insists it's a coincidence, maintaining that some kind of bug was already going around.""There's nobody up there that got sick off that milk,"" says Cadle, who had to stay home from work on Monday, 7 Mar 2016. ""It's just bad timing, I guess.""Another lawmaker who fell ill after taking a ""small sip"" to be polite thinks Cadle is right. ""I highly doubt raw milk had anything to do with it,"" he tells WSAZ.Nevertheless, state health officials are investigating after getting an anonymous tip asserting that the milk is to blame and that Cadle may have violated the new law by distributing it in the House chamber as he did, reports ABC News.""It's important to note that a lot of the information out there is alleged,"" says one health official. ""It's important to conduct an investigation to figure out exactly the facts."" (Maybe coconut milk is the way to go for the squeamish?)[Byline: John Johnson]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Thu 10 Mar 2016Source: Food Dive [edited]<http://www.fooddive.com/news/raw-milk-permitted-in-wv-but-lawmakers-fall-ill-after-drinking-it/415375/>West Virginia has passed a new law allowing shared animal ownership, also known as a herd sharing agreement, as a legal way for residents to consume raw milk. All other raw milk sales are still illegal in the state. In 2015, the governor vetoed a similar bill citing health risks, and local health officials were disappointed that he changed his mind this year [2016].In a notable twist of events, lawmakers who drank raw milk after passing the bill became sick, though they say it was from other colleagues being ill rather than from the raw milk itself. The state Department of Health and Human Resources is investigating.The ""responsible"" party in the shared animal ownership agreement is unable to distribute, sell, or resell raw milk on the market, so raw milk won't be appearing on grocery store shelves in West Virginia. The agreement enables people to still make the choice to drink raw milk, despite the noted health risks. But for the agreement, there are several provisions, including providing specific information to the Commissioner of Agriculture and an agreement that the consumer and his or her doctor will report any illnesses.These agreements could become more commonplace for state governments to permit citizens to drink raw milk. But by not allowing direct sales in grocery stores by the producers in the agreements, legislators still appease public health advocates who are concerned about safety.Consumer demand for raw milk continues to grow despite the health risks. However, growth of the segment is hindered by the US Pasteurized Milk Ordinance, which states that only pasteurized milk can cross state lines. State governments thereby must figure out laws and methods for both preventing and/or enabling consumers to buy or consume raw milk within the state.[Byline: Carolyn Heneghan]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The manifestations of illness occurring in those who drank the unpasteurized milk is not clearly stated, nor is the time between ingestion and onset of illness.In the March 2012 issue of Emerging Infectious Diseases (Langer AJ, Ayers T, Grass J, et al. Nonpasteurized dairy products, disease outbreaks, and state laws -- United States, 1993-2006. Emerg Infect Dis. 2012; 18(3): 385-91. Available at <http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/18/3/11-1370_article.htm>), the authors report on 121 foodborne outbreaks (with 4413 cases of reported illness) caused by contaminated dairy products, and 73 (60 per cent) were involved with unpasteurized dairy products; 65 (54 per cent) involved cheese, 42 per cent made from unpasteurized milk; and 56 involved fluid milk, 82 per cent involving unpasteurized milk. In these outbreaks, campylobacter was responsible for 54 per cent of the outbreaks, following by _Salmonella_ spp (22 per cent), enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ (13 per cent), _Brucella_ spp (4 per cent), _Listeria_ spp (4 per cent), and _Shigella_ spp (3 per cent).A recently published paper (Claeys WL, Cardoen S, Daube G, et al. Raw or heated cow milk consumption: review of risks and benefits. Food Control 2013; 31(1): 251-62) is available at <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.09.035>. It addresses the arguments that pasteurization removes significant nutrients from milk.The abstract, introduction, and conclusions are given below with the citations removed.Abstract:""In the context of the prevailing trend toward more natural products, there seems to be an increasing preference for raw milk consumption, as raw milk is associated with several perceived health benefits that are believed to be destroyed upon heating. However, many human pathogens can be isolated from raw cow milk. The prevalence of foodborne pathogens in raw cow milk varies, but their presence has been demonstrated in many surveys, and foodborne infections have been repeatedly reported for _Campylobacter_, _Salmonella_ spp. and human pathogenic verocytotoxin-producing _Escherichia coli_ [VTEC]. In industrialized countries, milk-borne and milk product-borne outbreaks represent 2-6 per cent of the bacterial foodborne outbreaks.""The aim of this review is to present scientifically sound data regarding the risks and benefits related to the consumption of raw and heated cow milk. Both microbiological aspects (such as the prevalence of milk-borne pathogens, pathogen growth inhibition by antimicrobial systems and by lactic acid producing bacteria, probiotic bacteria, etc.) and nutritional or health aspects (nutritional value, immunity, allergies, lactose intolerance, diabetes, milk digestibility, etc.) are considered.""As such, it is demonstrated that consumption of raw milk poses a realistic health threat due to a possible contamination with human pathogens. It is therefore strongly recommended that milk should be heated before consumption. With the exception of an altered organoleptic profile [taste], heating (in particular ultra high temperature and similar treatments) will not substantially change the nutritional value of raw milk or other benefits associated with raw milk consumption.""Introduction------------""The consumption of raw milk is not well-documented, but in the context of the current trend toward 'consuming natural' and 'purchasing locally,' raw milk consumption is becoming more popular. This is nourished by the perception that heating destroys the nutritional and health benefits of milk, and can even induce some detrimental effects. However, due to its high nutritional value together with the neutral pH and high water activity [content?], raw milk serves as an excellent growth medium for different micro-organisms, whose multiplication depends mainly on temperature and on competing microorganisms and their metabolic products. In order to guarantee its microbial safety and to prolong its shelf-life, milk is heat treated.""The impact of milk pasteurization on public health can be clearly illustrated by means of historical data. Before 1938, an estimated 25 per cent of all foodborne and waterborne disease outbreaks in the USA were associated with milk, whereas nowadays, the percentage of such outbreaks associated with milk is estimated to be below one per cent. Between 1880 and 1907, 29 milkborne outbreaks were reported on average each year in the USA. With the adoption of pasteurization in 1938, milkborne diseases dropped to only 46 outbreaks during the 19-year period from 1973 to 1992, corresponding to an average of 2.4 outbreaks each year. A recent report of the USA CDC indicates that the vast majority of milkborne outbreaks in the USA are in states that permit the sale of raw milk. In England and Wales, the great majority of milkborne outbreaks during the 1980s were attributed to the consumption of raw milk. In Scotland, a similar situation existed until the sale of unpasteurized milk was prohibited in 1983, which led to a significant drop of the incidence of diseases related to liquid milk consumption.""In the mid-20th century, the main illnesses associated with raw milk consumption were brucellosis and tuberculosis. These have been eradicated as milkborne diseases in developed countries, mainly through herd certification programs which included culling of infected animals, the installation of refrigerated bulk tanks for milk collection on farms, and the introduction of pasteurization. In the past, pasteurization conditions were standardized based on the destruction of _Mycobacterium bovis_, a relatively heat-resistant non-sporogenic bacterium that formerly was among the most serious pathogenic bacteria present in milk. Pasteurization standards today are based upon the destruction of _Coxiella burnetii_, the most heat-resistant milkborne zoonotic pathogen known. In the past 30 years, several previously unrecognized foodborne bacterial infections, including infection with _Campylobacter jejuni_, _Listeria monocytogenes_, and _Escherichia coli_ strain O157 (or more general verocytotoxin-producing pathogenic _E. coli_ [VTEC]), have emerged as significant causes of human morbidity and mortality. Pathogens mainly present in raw milk today are, among others, _C. jejuni_, _Salmonella_ spp., _Staphylococcus aureus_, _Listeria monocytogenes_, pathogenic _E. coli_ and _Yersinia enterocolitica_.""In Europe, the current regulatory microbial criteria for raw cow milk are less than or equal to 100 000 colony forming units (cfu)/ml for plate count (at 30 C / 86 F) and less than or equal to 400 000 cfu/ml for somatic cells, as is stipulated in Regulation (EC) 853/2004 laying down specific hygiene rules on the hygiene of foodstuffs. In this Regulation, health requirements for production animals and hygienic requirements on milk production holdings (such as regarding premises and equipment, hygiene during milking, collection, and transport, staff hygiene) are established as well. In general, raw milk intended for human consumption must meet the requirements of the General Food Law (Regulation (EC) 178/2002) and be free of pathogens. Even though improvements in hygiene resulted in routine production of raw cow milk with less than 20 000 cfu (total flora)/ml), this does not guarantee raw milk to be free of pathogens. In approximately 1-6 per cent of the human outbreaks reported in developed countries, milk has been identified as the vehicle of infection. An overview of foodborne disease reports from different industrialized countries indicates that milk and milk products are implicated in 1-5 per cent of the total bacterial foodborne outbreaks, with 39.1 per cent attributed to milk, 53.1 per cent to cheese, and 7.8 per cent to other milk products.""Whereas milk quality and safety has been the topic of many research studies, raw milk still continues to be an issue for debate, which is primarily held on the internet where often non-scientifically based information circulates. Therefore, the aim of this study is to evaluate the risks and benefits related to the consumption of raw cow milk at one hand, and to evaluate the effect of heat treatments of milk on these risks and benefits on the other hand, considering the microbiological as well as the nutritional (health) aspects.""Conclusions-----------""In this evaluation it is clearly demonstrated that the consumption of raw milk poses a realistic and unnecessary health threat because of its possible contamination with pathogenic bacteria. It is therefore recommended to heat [raw] milk before consumption, especially when served to young children, pregnant women, or any person suffering from a chronic disease or a suppressed immune system. In this context the attention is drawn to raw milk provided on farms to the general public (such as during a school visit) and raw milk distributors allowing the automatic supply of raw milk from a bulk reservoir to the consumer.""Historical data show that the pasteurization of milk has led to improved public health, and more recent data on occasional raw milk consumption indicate the hazard of bacterial infections, which could be avoided by a heat treatment. At present, thermal treatment remains the most frequently used and most effective method to increase the microbiological safety of milk without substantially changing the nutritional value of milk or other benefits associated with raw milk consumption. Table 4 [see original URL above] summarizes the main (claimed) benefits of raw milk consumption and the (claimed) detrimental effects of heating discussed in the present paper. Almost all arguments put forward by raw milk proponents for not heating milk, can be refuted, and the only substantial disadvantage of heating is the change in the organoleptic profile [taste] of milk. It is clear that this 'detrimental' effect of heating does not countervail the risk posed by raw milk consumption, namely of a milk-borne pathogen infection, which can have serious health consequences."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/249>.]
