BBC News [edited]<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-35800392>Officials have confirmed 8 people have died in a chemical accident in the basement of a Bangkok bank.The contractors were working on a fire safety system at the headquarters of the Siam Commercial bank on Sunday night [13 Mar 2016], the bank said in a statement.They apparently suffocated after a gas mixture which depletes oxygen was released.Another 7 were injured in the incident, which may have been caused by contractors' ""negligence"", it added.A bank spokesman told the BBC the incident took place in a vault storing documents in the head office in Bangkok. The bank said at around 21:30 local time on [Sun 13 Mar 2016] (14:30 GMT), an aerosol system called pyrogen was ""inadvertently activated and exhausted all the oxygen in the area"" as contractors were working on it.Pyrogen involves a mixture of gases including potassium carbonates, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxide, and ammonia. The system works by removing all oxygen from the air to stifle a fire.The Bangkok Post reported that firemen encountered delays as they tried to reach the victims due to tightly locked doors.The bank, one of Thailand's largest financial institutions, added that it would provide assistance to those in the accident and operations would continue normally.Correspondents say that fatal industrial accidents remain rare in Thailand. A toy factory fire in 1993 which killed nearly 200 people and injured another 500 is considered the worst the country has seen.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Something seems odd here. The papers were stored in a vault. The vault was presumably air tight. So the testing company tests the ""fire"" extinguisher in a room of valuable papers, with the door shut and supposedly air tight?Pyrogen is designed to rapidly and efficiently extinguish fires by, removing the air from the room to suffocate a fire, which would presumably leave paper intact.If this is the scenario, then testing the extinguisher in such a space would say to me that the team was not fully or well trained, or there was some sort of terrible accident to allow this to happen.PyroGen is a pyrogenic aerosol extinguishing system, and is one of the most efficient Halon [a banned chlorofluorocarbon, ozone depleting substance] alternative agents available.PyroGen belongs to a relatively new class of fire suppression agents - pyrotechnically generated or pyrogenic aerosols. Being environmentally friendly and 3 to 6 times more effective on a mass basis than Halon 1301, the pyrogenic aerosols have already been acclaimed as a potential halon alternative for total flooding applications.Pyrogenic aerosol is a combustion product of a specially designed solid or gelled chemical, which contains an oxidizing agent and a combustible binder. When ignited, the chemical produces fine solid particles and gaseous products that mix together into a highly dispersed aerosol. Extinguishment action of the aerosol can be compared with that of an ultra fine dry chemical powder. Micron size of aerosol particles provides an extremely high surface area for an extinguishment actions and gas-like 3 dimensional distribution of the aerosol. Pyrogenic mechanism of aerosol generation provides a sufficient driving force, thus eliminating need for stored pressurized cylinders and propellant gases.The principle of extinguishing action employed by PyroGen is unique -- a special solid chemical, when electrically or thermally ignited, produces combustion products - micron size dry chemical particles and gases that mix together into an uniform aerosol.This aerosol is extremely effective in extinguishing fires, especially those involving materials of hydrocarbon origin, such as petroleum, diesel, hydraulic liquid, lubricants, natural gas, wood etc. The micron size aerosol particles exhibit gas like three dimensional qualities that allow the agent to rapidly distribute throughout an enclosure and reach into the most concealed and shielded locations.PyroGen has a knock-down effect. Its extinguishing action is achieved primarily by interfering chemically with the fire reaction and secondarily by thermal cooling. Normal design concentration is only 100 g/m3, which is more than 3 times lower than that for Halon 1301 (330 g/m3). Such low design concentration coupled with almost instantaneous extinguishing action makes PyroGen one of the most efficient agents currently available.As PyroGen aerosol stays in suspension it is easily removed by any airflow. As such application in vehicle suppression systems would leave no residue and, therefore, no clean-up would be required after use. This does not apply to marine applications as the engine compartment in a vessel is enclosed, forced ventilation will be required after Pyrogen discharge. As forced ventilation may not be immediate, post-discharge clean-up may be required.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.pyrogen.com/auto02.htm> and <http://www.nist.gov/el/fire_research/upload/R0301139.pdf>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1370>.].................................................sb/tg/mj/mpp"
