Food Poisoning Bulletin [edited]<https://foodpoisoningbulletin.com/2016/pizza-ranch-linked-to-multistate-e-coli-outbreak/>A multistate _E. coli_ outbreak has been linked to food served at Pizza Ranch restaurants. The outbreak includes 5 cases in Minnesota and one in Kansas. Other states may also be included. At least one person has been hospitalized with hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) a complication of _E. coli_ infections that causes kidney failure, seizure, stroke, coma and death. HUS most often affects children. Pizza dough is a suspected source of the outbreak. But, health officials have not yet determined how the contamination occurred.Pizza Ranch does business in 13 states: Iowa, Minnesota, South Dakota, North Dakota, Wisconsin, Michigan, Nebraska, Illinois, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado. There may cases reported from some of those states. In Minnesota, where 5 cases of _E. coli_ O157 infection have been reported, meals linked to illnesses were purchased from 6 Dec 2015 to 16 Jan 2016. In Kansas, one case has been reported.In 2009, an _E. coli_ outbreak linked to Nestle Tollhouse Cookie dough sickened 72 people in 30 states. Contaminated flour was suspected as the source of the problem in the dough. 34 people were hospitalized, 10 developed hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS).[Byline: Carla Gillespie]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Nothing is stated regarding how raw pizza dough (a suspected vehicle here), unless eaten raw, could transmit _E. coli_ O157 after being cooked properly. If these indeed were properly cooked pizzas, they could have been contaminated after cooking or an ingredient such as salad could have been placed on the pizza after cooking.Although an enterohemorrhagic strain of _E. coli_ was reported to have been isolated from a previously unopened package of the Toll House refrigerated cookie dough, the strain was not shown to be identical to the mentioned 2009 outbreak strain. At least 10 cases associated with that outbreak resulted in hemolytic uremic syndrome. Commercial flour is not generally thought of as a source of enteric pathogens but certainly needs to be thought of in the right situation.The following is extracted from a 2011 ProMED post regarding the 2009 raw commercial cookie dough outbreak (E. coli O157, 2009 - USA: cookie dough, raw flour source Archive Number: 20111217.3619):A new study that investigated the cause of a large outbreak of _E. coli_ [O157] in 2009 pointed the blame at raw chocolate chip cookie dough. The researchers say it is the 1st time an outbreak of food poisoning caused by the dangerous Shiga toxin-producing _E. coli_ has been traced to store-bought, ready-to-bake cookie dough or a similar product. The outbreak, between March and July 2009, sickened at least 80 people across 30 states, 35 of whom had to be hospitalized.Anyone who has ever baked homemade cookies knows how tempting the batter can be. And although most people are aware that sneaking a bite carries a risk, that knowledge apparently is not much of a deterrent. A 2008 study of risky eating behaviors among college students found that 53 percent admitted to eating unbaked homemade cookie dough. In the new study, published in the latest issue of the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases, several of the people who were sickened bought the contaminated cookie dough with the sole intention of eating it raw. ""They had no plans to actually bake cookies,"" the authors reported.Prudent chefs and parents everywhere usually cite a single cookie dough ingredient, raw eggs which can carry _Salmonella_, as the reason to bake before eating. But the study, led by Dr Karen Neil, a medical epidemiologist with the CDC, found that the culprit in this case was likely not eggs, but flour. ""Out of all the ingredients, raw flour is the only raw agricultural product that was in the cookie dough,"" Dr Neil said. ""It didn't undergo any specific processing to kill pathogens, so we feel that's the most likely suspect for what may have introduced contamination into the cookie dough. We couldn't prove it conclusively, but that's what we suspect.""As with many commercial food products, the eggs used in the contaminated cookie dough were pasteurized, a process that kills pathogens. The molasses, sugar, baking soda, and margarine used in the dough also underwent ""pathogen kill steps"" during processing that made them unlikely to be sources of the contamination, and the chocolate chips used in the dough revealed no evidence of _E. coli_, the researchers found.One study that looked at commercial wheat flour samples found almost 13 percent contaminated with _E. coli_. The investigators also pointed out that wheat flour can also be contaminated with _Salmonella_, and that flour-based mixes have previously been implicated in outbreaks of food-borne illness.Home cooks who prefer making their own batter should still be just as wary of consuming unbaked cookie dough, especially because of the _Salmonella_ risk from raw eggs, Dr Neil added. ""It's difficult to do a direct comparison of the risks,"" she said, ""but the bottom line is consumers should not eat raw cookie dough, or really any other raw product that's intended to be baked or cooked before consumption.""""I think the safest thing people can do is just practice good safety measures in general,"" she said. ""The 4 basic messages we use are clean, separate, cook, and chill."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
