WPTZ Burlington [edited]<http://www.wptz.com/news/52-more-wells-test-positive-for-pfoa-in-north-bennington/38525090>Vermont Governor Peter Shumlin said more wells in North Bennington [Vermont] have tested positive for the toxic chemical PFOA [perfluorooctanoic acid].More than 150 concerned members of the Bennington and North Bennington communities attended an informational meeting Friday evening [11 Mar 2016] at the North Bennington Fire Department.Shumlin said the 2nd round of well water test results were received [Mon 14 Mar 2016] by state officials.Of the 67 private wells tested, 52 showed levels of PFOA higher than the Health Department's acceptable level of 20 parts per trillion. The results ranged from 38 parts per trillion to 2730 parts per trillion, the governor said. 12 samples did not detect any PFOA and 3 showed results within acceptable levels. PFOA is a known carcinogen.In all, 185 wells within a 1.5-mile [2.4 km] radius of the former Chemfab plant have been tested. 6 wells tested positive for PFOA in February [2016].Testing to the public water supply, including samples taken from an elementary school, show no PFOA contamination.Soil sampling at the former facility and residences where PFOA levels were detected will begin [Wed 16 Mar 2016]. State officials will collect 100 soil samples from more than 25 locations. The results were expected back in the next few weeks.""This feels like a little piece of heaven for all of us who live on the hill on this beautiful street and we have a nice view and everything, but you kind of want to feel like, you know, the food that you're eating out of the garden and the water you're drinking is also good, too,"" Rev. Penny Rich-Smith said.Her home is on the edge of the radius of where testing took place. Results for Rich-Smith's water came back positive for PFOA contamination. ""It's hard using bottled water for everything,"" Rich-Smith said.The Department of Environmental Conservation began notifying residents of the test results [Sun 13 Mar 2016]. The notifications came as New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo declared neighboring Hoosick Falls' PFOA water contamination at non-detectable levels.A public meeting about the test results and contamination was planned for 6 pm [Wed 16 Mar 2016] at Tishman Lecture Hall on the Bennington College campus.Bottled water remains available for residents to pick up at the North Bennington Village Variety Store at 9 Route 67 West. It was also being delivered to affected homes.Two water tankers from which residents can draw water were located across the street from the former Chemfab plant at the intersection of Water Street and Route 67A. Water treatment systems were also being offered to affected residents.A state information office is also open at 324 Main St.[Byline: Brad Evans]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), also known as C8 and perfluorooctanoate, is a synthetic (man-made) perfluorinated carboxylic acid and fluorosurfactant. It is used in the process of making Teflon and similar chemicals (known as fluorotelomers), although it is burned off during the process and is not present in significant amounts in the final products.PFOA has the potential to be a health concern because it can stay in the environment and in the human body for long periods of time. Studies have found that it is present worldwide at very low levels in just about everyone's blood. Higher blood levels have been found in community residents where local water supplies have been contaminated by PFOA. People exposed to PFOA in the workplace can have levels many times higher. While this chemical is used to make Teflon, Teflon has not been shown to be toxic, but this information is about the chemical, not about Teflon.PFOA and some similar compounds can be found at low levels in some foods, drinking water, and in household dust. Although PFOA levels in drinking water are usually low, they can be higher in certain areas, such as near chemical plants that use PFOA. People can also be exposed to PFOA from ski wax or from fabrics and carpeting that have been treated to be stain resistant. Non-stick cookware is not a significant source of PFOA exposure.PFOA has been linked to cancers.The long-term effects of PFOA and similar chemicals are largely unknown, but there has been enough concern to prompt an attempt to phase out industrial emissions of them. Only a handful of companies have used these chemicals in manufacturing in recent years.While the possible long-term health effects of PFOA are not known, the issue is currently under study by the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) and other agencies. In addition, in 2006, the EPA and the 8 manufacturers who used PFOA at the time agreed to a ""stewardship program."" The goals were for the companies to reduce factory emissions and product content levels of PFOA by 95 percent by the year 2010, and to eliminate PFOA from emissions and product contents by the end of 2015. The companies have submitted annual reports on their progress to the EPA, and the latest reports indicated a large reduction in use of these chemicals. The decreasing demand for PFOA has also led to many companies phasing out production. The EPA does not regulate the levels of PFOA or related chemicals (such as perfluorooctane sulfonate, or PFOS) in drinking water at this time. However, in 2009, the EPA released provisional health advisories (PHAs) for PFOA and PFOS in drinking water. These advisories recommend that actions should be taken to reduce exposure when contaminants go above a certain level in the drinking water -- 0.4 microgram/liter for PFOA and 0.2 microgram/liter for PFOS. These advisories are not legally enforceable federal standards and are subject to change as new information becomes available. However, they are being used as the recommend level to avoid or presumably avoid health issues in people, animals and the environment.PFOS and PFOA are extremely persistent in the environment and resistant to typical environmental degradation processes. As a result, they are widely distributed across the higher trophic levels and are found in soil, air and groundwater at sites across the United States. The toxicity, mobility and bioaccumulation potential of PFOS and PFOA pose potential adverse effects for the environment and human health. Portions of this comment have been extracted from<https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-04/documents/factsheet_contaminant_pfos_pfoa_march2014.pdf> and<http://www.cancer.org/cancer/cancercauses/othercarcinogens/athome/teflon-and-perfluorooctanoic-acid--pfoa>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/39925>.]
