Orissa Diary [edited]<http://www.orissadiary.com/CurrentNews.asp?id=65697>The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has sought action [regarding the] thousands of children that fell sick across various parts of the country [India] on 10 Feb [2016], hours after being administered pills under a nationwide deworming programme.In Odisha, Bihar, Haryana, Chhattisgarh, Maharastra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and other states, many children complained of symptoms ranging from mild discomfort to nausea and stomach ache after taking albendazole pills on National Deworming Day.Acting on a complaint filed by an Odisha based rights activist Akhand of Civil Society Forum on Human Rights (CSFHR), the Commission has directed the Secretary of Ministry of Health and family welfare to file a report on the matter within 4 weeks.The petitioner has alleged that more than 200 children across the Odisha have fallen ill after consuming the deworming drug 'Albendazole'. About 100 children fell ill at the Maghra Middle School in Biharsharif district headquarters of Nalanda, 37 in Jamui, 36 in Sitamarhi, 4 in East Champaran and 2 in Rohtas district. The incident in Haryana occurred at the Hindu Vidyapeeth School in Sonepat. Students reportedly started vomiting after taking Albendazole tablets, while some also fainted. Eighteen children were taken to the government hospital.Seven students at a government primary school in Bamnidih block and 5 students in another government school of Jaijaipur block of Janjgir-Champa district complained of uneasiness and nausea after consuming anti-worm tablets. In Jashpur and Sukma also several students have fallen sick after consuming the pills.In Maharastra, there are reports that several children fell ill after being administered de-worming pills. National Deworming Day turned out to be a nightmare for over 100 children in over 9 districts of Madhya Pradesh. Ten students of a government primary school in Fatehabad fell ill after consuming albendazole tablets.Akhand alleged that, though thousands of children fell ill, no probe order has been given. Health officials are taking it very easily. He has raised questions over timing of administering the medicines to the school children.The Complainant has prayed for a probe order into these incidents and testing of quality of medicines provided. Hearing the matter, the Commission has called for an action taken report on the matter within 4 weeks time.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED recently (1 Mar 2016) posted a similar report from Kenya (see below). In our comments on that report, we suggested that children hosting intestinal helminths may feel discomfort like the described symptoms when treated (McCORT JJ: Ascaris ileus in children. Radiology 1958;70:528-31). This also applies to India. It is therefore important in the investigation requested by the Ministry of Health to ask if the children passed parasites; especially _Ascaris_ is usually noticed after treatment. Also, the quality and purity of the Albendazole formulation used should be investigated. More information from the investigations into this event would be grealy appreciated.- Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/142>.]
