CDC, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 65(10);253-256 [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6510a1.htm>[Authors: P. Drew Pratt, MS; Kathleen Henschel, MPH; George Turabelidze, MD, PhD; Autumn Grim, MPH; James A. Ellison, PhD; Lillian Orciari, MS; Pamela Yager; Richard Franka, DVM, PhD; Xianfu Wu, DVM, PhD; Xiaoyue Ma, MPH; Ashutosh Wadhwa, PhD; Todd G. Smith, PhD; Brett Petersen, MD; Miriam Shiferaw, MD]Summary-------What is already known about this topic?Human rabies in the United States is rare (1 to 3 cases are reported annually). However, because the virus is endemic in the U.S. wildlife population, susceptible domestic animals and humans exposed to rabid animals are at risk for developing rabies infection.What is added by this report?Early diagnosis of human rabies infection might be hampered by delayed recognition, given the rarity of the disease, nonspecific initial symptoms, and difficulty in obtaining animal exposure history once the patient is in the later stages of illness.What are the implications for public health practice?To prevent rabies, 1) continue to educate the public and health care providers about the risk for exposure to rabies virus from bats and other mammalian species and the importance of prompt medical evaluation and initiation of postexposure prophylaxis and 2) promote consistent adherence to standard precautions among health care providers in the treatment of all potentially infectious patients.On 18 Sep 2014, the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services (MDHSS) was notified of a suspected rabies case in a Missouri resident. The patient, a man aged 52 years, lived in a rural, deeply wooded area, and bat sightings in and around his home were anecdotally reported. Exposure to bats poses a risk for rabies. After 2 emergency department visits for severe neck pain, paresthesia in the left arm, upper body tremors, and anxiety, he was hospitalized on 13 Sep 2014 for encephalitis of unknown etiology. On 24 Sep 2014, he received a diagnosis of rabies and on 26 Sep 2014, he died. Genetic sequencing tests confirmed infection with a rabies virus variant associated with tricolored bats. Health care providers need to maintain a high index of clinical suspicion for rabies in patients who have unexplained, rapidly progressive encephalitis, and adhere to recommended infection control practices when examining and treating patients with suspected infectious diseases.Case Report-----------On the morning of 12 Sep 2015 [presumably this is a typo from MMWR as this is a case report from 2014 - Mod.TG], a Missouri resident, a man aged 52 years, visited hospital A's emergency department for evaluation of acute onset of severe neck pain that radiated down his left arm to his hand. After a cervical spine radiograph, a diagnosis of cervical muscle strain and radiculopathy was made, for which the patient received injections of orphenadrine (a muscle relaxant) and ketolorac (a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug). He was instructed to take ibuprofen and cyclobenzaprine (a muscle relaxant) for pain relief and to return if symptoms worsened. The next day, he awoke with numbness and tingling in his left arm, severe bilateral upper body tremors, and sweating, as well as continued neck pain. He returned to hospital A's emergency department, where he received a diagnosis of a herniated disc and was discharged with instructions to take oral prednisone and oxycodone HCl/acetaminophen. That same evening, while the patient was at home, his symptoms progressed, and he became anxious and fearful; family members transported him back to the emergency department, during which time he began experiencing visual hallucinations. He was admitted to hospital A with a diagnosis of suspected serotonin syndrome secondary to the cyclobenzaprine.On [13 Sep 2014] the patient was treated with oral ibuprofen and cyproheptadine and with parenteral lorazepam, diazepam, diphenhydramine, and haloperidol. On [14 Sep 2014] losartan and hydrochlorothizide were prescribed to be taken orally for hypertension, but the patient was unable to swallow these medications. His condition progressively worsened, with the development of considerable rigidity and action tremors in his upper extremities. That same day, he was transferred to hospital B, a tertiary care referral hospital, for neurologic evaluation. Upon admission, he was febrile (104.9 deg F [40.5 deg C]), tachycardic, tachypneic, and hypertensive with bilateral upper extremity tremors and whole body myoclonic jerks. On [15 Sep 2014] he required intubation and mechanical ventilation for airway protection. Before intubation, the patient orally communicated an aversion to water.During the next 11 days the patient underwent an extensive laboratory evaluation to determine the cause of his encephalopathy, including a urine drug screen, tricyclic antidepressant levels, an arbovirus panel, and testing for antibodies to Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehrlichiosis, syphilis, and herpes simplex virus; all test results were negative. The peripheral white blood cell count and liver enzymes were both slightly elevated. On [19 Sep 2014] a traumatic lumbar puncture yielded hemorrhagic cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with elevated glucose, protein, and white blood cells. Electroencephalogram studies indicated generalized slowing of brain activity, minimal reactivity to noxious stimulation, and absent posterior dominant rhythm, consistent with encephalopathy. The patient required dopamine and norepinephrine for cardiovascular support, continuous mechanical ventilation for acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, and hemodialysis for acute kidney injury. Initial treatment included broad-spectrum antibiotics for presumed sepsis and acyclovir for suspected herpes encephalitis.Family members initially reported that the patient lived in a trailer on 97 densely wooded acres, but his exposure to wildlife was not known at that time. Because of the acute and rapidly progressive clinical course of his illness and the elimination of the most common etiologies of encephalitis from the differential diagnoses, the possibility of rabies was considered, public health officials notified, and confirmatory laboratory testing initiated on [18 Sep 2014]Serum, CSF, nuchal skin biopsy, and saliva specimens collected on [19 Sep 2014] were submitted to CDC on [22 Sep 2014] for rabies testing.On [24 Sep 2014] rabies was confirmed by the presence of rabies virus antigen in the skin biopsy, and the detection of rabies virus in saliva and skin by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Genomic sequencing found the variant to be associated with the tricolored bat (_Perimyotis subflavus_ [formerly _Pipistrellus subflavus_]). Neither antirabies antibodies (immunoglobulin G or immunoglobulin M) nor rabies virus neutralizing antibodies were detected by indirect fluorescent antibody or rapid fluorescent focus inhibition tests in the serum and CSF specimens collected on [19 Sep 2014] However, both antirabies antibodies and rabies virus neutralizing antibodies were subsequently detected in a serum specimen collected on [25 Sep 2014] Because of the advanced stage of illness and worsening prognosis, the Milwaukee protocol (1) was not initiated. On [26 Sep 2014] the family elected to withdraw life support, and the patient died shortly thereafter.Public Health Investigation---------------------------On [18 Sep 2014] an infectious disease specialist at hospital B notified MDHSS of the suspected human rabies case. After confirmation of the diagnosis, MDHSS, local public health agency officials, and infection prevention specialists at hospitals A and B interviewed family members, friends, and hospital personnel in an effort to determine the patient's exposure and travel history and to identify any high-risk exposures that would require rabies postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) (2). Two questionnaires developed by CDC were used to evaluate health care workers and family and community members for possible exposure to the patient.The variant identified from genetic sequencing of rabies virus from the patient was from _Perimyotis subflavus_ (tricolored bat), one of the smallest bats in eastern North America. The rabies variant associated with this bat species occasionally infects other bats (e.g., _Tadarida braziliensis_ [big brown bat]) as well as cats, foxes, and other species. Any of these animal sources could have accounted for the patient's exposure.Although the exact exposure date is unknown, the patient had reported seeing a bat in his home in late August or early September 2014. He also worked in a warehouse in which coworkers reported that bats are occasionally seen, but no bat sightings in the several weeks before the patient's illness onset were reported. Public health investigators who visited the patient's trailer home noted several places where a small animal, such as a bat, could have entered. A family member reported having observed bats roosting on a utility pole near the trailer in the past. This information, combined with documentation of previous bat-variant rabies cases with undocumented or unidentified exposures (3), makes a bat the most likely source of rabies infection in this patient. Symptom onset was estimated to be September 6, based on a family member's recollection that the patient complained of fatigue and neck pain during that weekend. Rabies infection from a bat exposure during late August or early September would suggest a shorter incubation period than the typical 3-8 weeks (2). Thus an earlier, undetected bat exposure might be more likely.Nine family members and friends were identified as having potential high-risk exposures to the saliva from the patient through mucous membranes or small, open hand wounds; all received rabies PEP. Among the 73 health care workers who provided care to the patient at hospitals A and B, 7 met Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices criteria for rabies PEP (2). Health care-associated exposures primarily occurred through prolonged contact with the patient's face, saliva, or tears with ungloved hands and nonintact skin.Discussion----------This case illustrates the importance of educating the public about potential rabies reservoirs and exposure sources in the United States and of promptly seeking medical attention after any potential rabies exposure. Rabies is preventable after an exposure through timely PEP, which includes wound washing and administration of rabies immune globulin and rabies vaccine (2). Bat exposures are high-risk exposures for rabies virus infection, particularly because the wounds inflicted by bats are often minor and easily overlooked. No evidence-based treatment approach for clinical rabies exists. An experimental approach, the Milwaukee protocol, which was 1st used in 2004 in a Wisconsin patient who survived rabies infection (4), has been implemented with varying outcomes (1).This case is the 2nd case of human rabies in Missouri in 6 years; during this time, specimens from 6 humans were referred from the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory to CDC for antemortem rabies testing. In 2008, a male aged 55 years died of rabies in Missouri after being bitten on the ear by a bat (5); before this, the last Missouri rabies case was reported in 1959. During 2008-2011, a total of 11 human rabies cases were reported in the United States and Puerto Rico, including 5 cases with infections acquired overseas (6). Among the 6 domestically acquired cases, 5 were associated with bat variant rabies viruses; in 3 cases, a confirmed bat bite was reported. In Missouri, bats and skunks are principal reservoirs of rabies (7). Given that wild animals might not display obvious signs of rabies illness, it is important that, whenever possible, all bats and wild terrestrial carnivores implicated in a potential rabies exposure be euthanized and tested for rabies. This testing can ensure that PEP is appropriately administered to prevent rabies in persons with exposures to confirmed rabid animals, and might avoid misadministration of PEP to nonexposed persons.A review of human rabies cases in the United States during 1960-2010 found that a median of 39 contacts per case (range = 1-180) received PEP (8). Sixteen persons with possible exposure to the 2014 Missouri patient were identified (7 health care workers and 9 community members). According to the indications for rabies PEP (2), human-to-human transmission of rabies virus can occur through exposure to virus in saliva through mucous membranes or fresh, open cuts in the skin. Consistent adherence to standard precautions should minimize the need for rabies PEP in health care settings (9).Public education campaigns aimed at raising rabies awareness should address misconceptions about risk associated with bat encounters (e.g., lack of knowledge that bats can transmit rabies through small, undetected bites) that can lead to a delay in the timely response to potential rabies virus exposures. These campaigns should also emphasize the importance of completing the full rabies PEP series once initiated, unless the exposure source is determined not to be rabid through laboratory testing or successful (i.e., remains healthy) completion of a 10-day observation period for a dog, cat, or ferret (2). In addition to the importance of public education, health care workers should consider rabies in the differential diagnosis of any patient with acute, unexplained encephalitis, and use appropriate infection control practices when examining and treating patients with a suspected infectious disease.References1. Medical College of Wisconsin. Milwaukee protocol, version 4.0. Milwaukee, WI: Medical College of Wisconsin; 2012. <http://www.mcw.edu/FileLibrary/Groups/PedsInfectiousDiseases/Rabies/Milwaukee_protocol_v4_20913.pdf>2. Manning SE, Rupprecht CE, Fishbein D, et al. Human rabies prevention--United States, 2008: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep 2008;57(No. RR-03). [available at: <http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5703a1.htm>]3. CDC. Human rabies surveillance: cases of rabies in humans in the United States and Puerto Rico, 2003 through July 2014, by circumstances of exposure and rabies virus variant [Table]. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2015. <http://www.cdc.gov/rabies/location/usa/surveillance/human_rabies.html>4. Willoughby RE, Tieves KS, Hoffman GM, et al. Survival after treatment of rabies with induction of coma. N Engl J Med 2005;352:2508-14. [available at: <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa050382>]5. CDC. Human rabies--Missouri, 2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2009;58:1207-9. [available at: <http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5843a3.htm>6. CDC. Human rabies. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. <http://www.cdc.gov/rabies/location/usa/surveillance/human_rabies.html>7. Blanton JD, Robertson K, Palmer D, Rupprecht CE. Rabies surveillance in the United States during 2008. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009;235:676-89. [available at: <http://avmajournals.avma.org/doi/pdf/10.2460/javma.235.6.676>]8. Petersen BW, Rupprecht CE. Human rabies epidemiology and diagnosis [Chapter 10]. In: Tkachev S, ed. Non-flavivirus encephalitis. Rijeka, Crotia: InTech Open Science, 2011. [available at: <http://www.intechopen.com/books/non-flavivirus-encephalitis/human-rabies-epidemiology-and-diagnosis>]9. Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L; Health Care Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. 2007 guideline for isolation precautions: preventing transmission of infectious agents in health care settings. Am J Infect Control 2007;35(Suppl 2):S65-164. [available at: <http://www.ajicjournal.org/article/S0196-6553(07)00740-7/pdf>]Suggested citation for this article: Pratt PD, Henschel K, Turabelidze G, et al. Human Rabies -- Missouri, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:253-256. DOI: <http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6510a1>.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Rabies in most mammals can mimic a multitude of diseases. It is a pity that a better history was perhaps not available or obtained prior to this person's death. When case reports are available, it is always easy to see what should have happened, but in the moment it can be quite difficult. Nevertheless, it highlights the need for an exceptional history, and to always have rabies a rule out when any type of neurological disease is present or in some cases when the original complaint is not resolved after the 1st physician's visit. This particular case was reported on by ProMED-mail at the time of occurrence. Please see ProMED-mail posting Rabies - USA (29): (MO) human case 20140930.2818942. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/227>.]
