Saudi Arabia Ministry of Health [edited]<http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/default.aspx?PageIndex=1>As of 12:00 noon today [18 Mar 2016] there have been a total of:1351 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including574 deaths [reported case fatality rate 42.5 percent]756 recoveries, and21 currently active cases [including 3 asymptomatic infections]In the past 48 hours since the last update [16 Mar 2016] there have been:2 newly confirmed cases2 newly reported fatalities, and1 newly reported recoveryInformation on newly confirmed cases (2)18 Mar 2016<http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2016-03-18-001.aspx>1- A 60-year-old Saudi male from Buraidah, non-healthcare worker, currently in stable condition. Risk exposures presently under investigation but reported as no history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness.2- A 66-year-old Saudi male from Buraidah, non-healthcare worker, currently in stable condition. Risk exposures presently under investigation but reported as no history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness.Information on newly reported fatalities (2)18 Mar 2016<http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2016-03-18-001.aspx>A 45-year-old Saudi male from Alkharj, non-healthcare worker, history of pre-existing co-morbidities [reported as a newly confirmed case on 14 Mar 2016, at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. At the time of initial confirmation report he was classified as a primary case with a history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. - Mod.MPP]17 Mar 2016<http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2016-03-17-001.aspx>A 74-year-old Saudi female from Riyadh, non-healthcare worker, history of pre-existing co-morbidities [reported as a newly confirmed case on 12 Mar 2016, at which time she was noted to be in critical condition. At the time of initial confirmation report she was classified as a primary case but no history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. - Mod.MPP] Information on newly reported recovery (1)18 Mar 2016<http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2016-03-18-001.aspx>A 62-year-old Saudi male from Jubail, non-healthcare worker, history of pre-existing co-morbidities [reported as a newly confirmed case on 10 Mar 2016, at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. At the time of initial confirmation report he was classified as a primary case with a history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. - Mod.MPP]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It appears as though the outbreak in Buraidah (in Al Qasim province) may be continuing as new cases have been reported. This now brings the total number of newly confirmed cases reported from Buraidah since 3 Mar 2016 to 26, including 13 deaths (reported case fatality rate of 50 percent). A map showing the locations of all newly reported MERS-CoV associated events can be found at the source URLs. - Mod.MPP]******[2] Saudi Arabia - WHO update 18 Mar 2016Date: 18 Mar 2016Source: WHO Global Alert and Response, Disease Outbreak News<http://www.who.int/csr/don/18-march-2016-mers-saudi-arabia/en/>Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - Saudi Arabia 18 Mar 2016-------------------------------------Between 11 and 12 Mar 2016, the National IHR Focal Point for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia notified WHO of 6 additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection. Three of these reported cases are asymptomatic and linked to the MERS-CoV outbreak currently occurring in a hospital in Buraidah city.Details of the cases1- A 48-year-old male from Hail city developed an unrelated medical condition on 8 Mar 2016 and, on 9 Mar 2016, was admitted to hospital. On 10 Mar 2016, while hospitalized, he developed symptoms and, on 11 Mar 2016, tested positive for MERS-CoV. Currently, the patient, who has comorbidities, is in stable condition in a negative pressure isolation room on a ward. Investigation of history of exposure to the known risk factors in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms is ongoing. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 12 Mar 2016 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition.  At the time of initial confirmation report, was classified as a primary case but no contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. - Mod.MPP]2- A 74-year-old female from Riyadh city developed symptoms on 3 Mar 2016 and, on 9 Mar 2016, was admitted to hospital. The patient, who has comorbidities, tested positive for MERS-CoV on 11 Mar 2016. Currently, she is in critical condition in ICU. Investigation of history of exposure to the known risk factors in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms is ongoing. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 12 Mar 2016 at which time she was noted to be in critical condition.  She was reported as a fatality on 16 Mar 2016.  At the time of initial confirmation report, she was classified as a primary case but no contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. - Mod.MPP]3- An 83-year-old male from Al Makhwah city was admitted to a hospital in Jeddah for an unrelated medical condition on 6 Mar 2016. On 8 Mar 2016, while hospitalized, he developed symptoms and, on 10 Mar 2016, tested positive for MERS-CoV. Currently, the patient, who has comorbidities, is in stable condition in a negative pressure isolation room on a ward. Investigation of history of exposure to the known risk factors in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms is ongoing. [reported as a newly confirmed case in an 83 year old male from Baha on 12 Mar 2016 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition.  At the time of initial confirmation report, classification was under investigation. - Mod.MPP]4- A 31-year-old, non-national, female health care worker from Buraidah city was identified while asymptomatic through the tracing of contacts of MERS-CoV cases. The patient, who has no comorbidities, works in the hospital where the MERS-CoV outbreak is occurring. She tested positive for MERS-CoV on 11 Mar 2016. Currently, the patient is still asymptomatic in home isolation. Investigation of epidemiological links with MERS-CoV cases admitted to the same hospital is ongoing. [reported as a newly confirmed asymptomatic infection  on 12 Mar 2016 at which time she was classified as a healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP]5- A 29-year-old, non-national female from Buraidah city was identified while asymptomatic through the tracing of contacts of MERS-CoV cases. The patient, who has no comorbidities, works as a cleaner in the hospital where the MERS-CoV outbreak is occurring. She tested positive for MERS-CoV on 10 Mar 2016. Currently, the patient is still asymptomatic in home isolation. Investigation of epidemiological links with MERS-CoV cases admitted to the same hospital is ongoing. [reported as a newly confirmed asymptomatic infection  on 11 Mar 2016 at which time she was classified as a healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP]6- A 25-year-old, non-national, female health care worker from Buraidah city was identified while asymptomatic through the tracing of contacts of MERS-CoV cases. The patient, who has comorbidities, works in the hospital where the MERS-CoV outbreak is occurring. She tested positive for MERS-CoV on 10 Mar 2016. Currently, the patient is still asymptomatic in home isolation. Investigation of epidemiological links with MERS-CoV cases admitted to the same hospital is ongoing. [reported as a newly confirmed asymptomatic infection  on 11 Mar 2016 at which time she was classified as a healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP]Contact tracing of household and healthcare contacts is ongoing for these cases.The National IHR Focal Point for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also notified WHO of the death of 3 MERS-CoV cases that was reported in a previous DON on 16 Mar 2016 (case no. 1 and 7) and on 14 Mar 2016 (case no. 1).Globally, since September 2012, WHO has been notified of 1690 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV, including at least 603 related deaths.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp[According to the WHO update, there have now been 1690 laboratory confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection including at least 603 deaths reported to WHO since September 2012.  With the addition of the 10 cases and 7 deaths reported since 12 Mar 2016, this will bring the global tally to 1700 cases and 610 deaths The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be seen at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/131> - Mod.MPP]******[3] UAE - review of healthcare associated transmissionDate: Wed 16 Mar 2016Source: Healio [edited]<http://www.healio.com/infectious-disease/nosocomial-infections/news/online/%7B478da39e-b737-4ba8-886e-70119dec82ef%7D/mers-spreads-in-uae-health-care-facilities-before-diagnoses>MERS spreads in UAE health care facilities before diagnosesHunter JC, et al. Emerg Infect Dis. 2016;doi:10.3201/eid2204.151615.-----------------------------------------------------------Cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS, coronavirus infection spread in health care facilities in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, often before the disease was diagnosed, according to an analysis of 3 clusters conducted by the CDC and local researchers.The findings underscore the need for infection control measures at 1st points of entry in health care facilities and increased awareness of MERS coronavirus (MERS-CoV), according to Jennifer C. Hunter, DrPH, MPH, epidemiologist at the CDC's National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, and colleagues.""Because health care settings have the potential to contribute substantially to the spread of MERS-CoV infections, improving our understanding of infection risk and transmission patterns remains an urgent priority,"" they wrote in Emerging Infectious Diseases.Review of casesHunter and colleagues reviewed laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV reported to local health officials in Abu Dhabi from [1 Jan 2013 to 9 May 2014], and found that 42 percent of the 65 patients (n = 27) had health care-associated cases -- including 19 health care workers (HCWs).The researchers determined health care exposure as any patient who worked at, was admitted to or visited a health care facility during the 14 days before symptom onset and had exposure to a known MERS-CoV patient exclusively in this setting. Patients were determined by the researchers to have had confirmed exposure to the virus if they were within 2 meters of a symptomatic case. They were said to likely be exposed if they were in the same hospital unit for more than 1 hour, had a common HCW, or had moved into a bed or dialysis station vacated by a symptomatic patient, or if they were continuously hospitalized and experienced symptoms more than 14 days after admission.Epidemiologic and genetic sequencing suggested there were 3 health care clusters during this time, including one that resulted in 20 infected patients in a single hospital between March and April 2014, Hunter and colleagues reported. The source patient in that cluster was an expatriate man, aged 45 years, who had no apparent exposure to MERS-CoV before showing symptoms. He was assessed in an ED 3 times in early April [2014] for fever, cough, shortness of breath and pneumonia, before being admitted to a general medical unit.During examination in an ED room with a curtain divider, the man was given a surgical mask and oxygen, which staff said he repeatedly removed because of difficulty breathing, according to the researchers.The man died that month [April 2014] after he had been moved to the ICU and 1 day after his MERS-CoV diagnosis was confirmed. There were 12 secondary, 6 tertiary and 2 quaternary cases of MERS-CoV associated with the man's introduction to the hospital.Overall, 2 of the 3 source-case patients in the clusters died. There was one death among 3 infected hospital patients and no deaths among HCWs, Hunter and colleagues reported.Infections occur before diagnosisOf the 19 HCWs infected by MERS-CoV in the 3 clusters, 14 had provided care for a source case of the virus, the researchers found. Among them, 13 were exposed to the virus before the patient was diagnosed, and one was exposed after not adhering to ICU prevention measures.Hunter and colleagues estimated a 16 percent attack rate among HCWs in EDs -- about 4 times higher than that of household transmission estimates, they said.""We found that health care-associated transmission occurred predominantly when HCWs, patients and visitors were exposed to an infected person before recognition of MERS-CoV and implementation of appropriate infection prevention measures,"" they wrote. ""These findings underscore the importance of early detection and intervention to limit the spread of disease.""When combined with previous reports on more extensive transmission of MERS-CoV in health care facilities in South Korea, Saudi Arabia and Jordan, Hunter and colleagues said their analysis further showed that health care settings may be particularly efficient at transmitting the virus in the absence of appropriate infection prevention measures.Reasons for a delay in diagnosis varied among clusters, Hunter and colleagues reported. In the largest cluster, however, the source-case patient was placed under standard precautions rather than contact and airborne precautions, likely because he had no known risk factors, they said.""This cluster underscores the importance of maintaining vigilance and adherence to infection prevention policy, particularly in regions where known MERS-CoV infections exist,"" the investigators wrote.[Byline: Gerard Gallagher]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The full article is an excellent study: Hunter JC, Nguyen D, Aden B, Al Bandar Z, Al Dhaheri W, Abu Elkheir K, et al. Transmission of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infections in healthcare settings, Abu Dhabi. Emerg Infect Dis. 2016 Apr <http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2204.151615>. Abstract:""Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infections sharply increased in the Arabian Peninsula during spring 2014. In Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, these infections occurred primarily among healthcare workers and patients. To identify and describe epidemiologic and clinical characteristics of persons with healthcare-associated infection, we reviewed laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV cases reported to the Health Authority of Abu Dhabi during [1 Jan 2013 to 9 May 2014]. Of 65 case-patients identified with MERS-CoV infection, 27 (42 percent) had healthcare-associated cases. Epidemiologic and genetic sequencing findings suggest that 3 healthcare clusters of MERS-CoV infection occurred, including 1 that resulted in 20 infected persons in 1 hospital. MERS-CoV in healthcare settings spread predominantly before MERS-CoV infection was diagnosed, underscoring the importance of increasing awareness and infection control measures at 1st points of entry to healthcare facilities.""The final sentence of the abstract of this publication is of paramount importance: ""MERS-CoV in healthcare settings spread predominantly before MERS-CoV infection was diagnosed, underscoring the importance of increasing awareness and infection control measures at 1st points of entry to healthcare facilities.""The findings of the delayed identification of MERS-CoV as the driving force behind the nosocomial outbreaks is not surprising. It is clear that there has been significant missed transmission cycles of MERS-CoV ongoing in the identified countries where cases have been confirmed. It is surprising that there isn't the adaptation of routine universal precautions including contact and airborne precautions in dealing with febrile respiratory infections in the countries where MERS-CoV is known occur. The ongoing nosocomial outbreak in Buraidah, Saudi Arabia is another example of the result of delayed identification of MERS-CoV infection.It would be interesting to see a study addressing ""any healthcare contact"" in the 14 days preceding onset of illness as a possible risk factor for MERS-CoV infection among those cases classified as ""primary infections with no history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness.""The HealthMap/ProMED maps of the United Arab emirates can be seen at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/132> - Mod.MPP]
