California Department of Public Health [edited]<https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Pages/NR16-012.aspx>California Department of Public Health (CDPH) Director and State Public Health Officer Dr Karen Smith today, 17 Mar 2016, warned the public about the danger of consuming illegally manufactured Mexican-style soft cheeses, often sold by street vendors. ""These cheeses are often made with raw, unpasteurized milk and under unsanitary conditions,"" said Dr Smith. ""We are seeing a dramatic increase in the number of reported salmonellosis cases, particularly in the Hispanic community.""Since November 2015, at least 50 patients have been infected with 3 different strains of _Salmonella_. No deaths have been reported, but hospitalization has been required in several cases. The investigation into these cases is ongoing, but several patients have reported consuming potentially unpasteurized Mexican-style cheese purchased from street vendors before they became ill.Symptoms of salmonellosis include fever, abdominal cramps and diarrhea which may be bloody. While most individuals recover in 4 to 7 days without medical intervention, some may develop complications that require hospitalization. Infants, the elderly and people with weakened immune systems are at highest risk for more severe illness. CDPH recommends consumers experiencing any ill effects after consuming soft cheeses should consult their health care provider.The California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) recommends purchasing cheeses made by licensed manufacturers and kept in refrigerated cases at retail stores. More safety information is available through CDFA's, ""Illegal Cheese Can Make You Sick!"" campaign in both English and Spanish.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Previous outbreaks of salmonellosis have been associated with illegally manufactured cheeses popular in Latino communities. Consumers are strongly warned against buying cheese from street vendors and are urged to check the label on pre-packaged cheese. _Salmonella_ and _Listeria_ are the most common bacteria found in illegally manufactured cheese. While the bacteria cannot be detected by sight, taste or smell, they can cause severe illnesses, including fever, abdominal cramps and diarrhea. While most individuals recover in 3 to 5 days without medical intervention, the infection can be life-threatening to young children, the elderly and those with compromised immune systems.Legitimate, wholesome soft-style cheeses are available in the refrigerated case at retail stores and authenticated by label information specifying: legal name of the product, name and address of distributor or processor, quantity of contents, an ingredient statement, nutrition facts, and information on whether the cheese is manufactured from pasteurized dairy ingredients or aged over 60 days. Cheese that is sliced and wrapped in the presence of the customer is exempt from these requirements, but the retailer must identify the cheese by name.Consumers should always purchase milk and dairy products made by licensed manufacturers. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
