The Lancet Infectious Diseases [edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(16)00088-8/fulltext>Enny S PaixÌ£o, MSc , Maria Gloria Teixeira, PhD, Maria da ConceiÌ¤Ì£o N Costa, PhD, Laura C Rodrigues, PhD. Dengue during pregnancy and adverse fetal outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Background----Little is known about the possible adverse effects of dengue infection during pregnancy on fetal outcomes. In this systematic review and meta-analysis, we aimed to estimate the increase in risk of 4 adverse fetal outcomes in women who had dengue infection during pregnancy.Methods----For this systematic review and meta-analysis, we searched Medline, Embase, Global Health Library, and Scopus for articles published before 1 Aug 2015. We included original studies that reported any fetal outcomes for pregnant women who had dengue infection during the gestational period. Case-control, cohort, and cross-sectional studies and unselected case series were eligible for inclusion. We excluded case reports, ecological studies, reviews, in-vitro studies, and studies without data for pregnancy outcomes. We independently screened titles and abstracts to select papers for inclusion and scored the quality of those included in meta-analyses. For each study, we recorded study design, year of publication, study location, period of study, and authors and we extracted data for population characteristics such as the number of pregnancies, dengue diagnostic information, and the frequency of outcomes. We investigated 4 adverse fetal outcomes: stillbirth, miscarriage, preterm birth, and low birthweight. We estimated the increase in risk of these adverse fetal outcomes by use of Mantel-Haenszel methods. We assessed heterogeneity of odds ratios (OR) with the I2 statistic.Findings----We identified 278 non-duplicate records, of which 107 full-text articles were screened for eligibility. 16 studies were eligible for inclusion in the systematic review and 8 were eligible for the meta-analyses, which included 6071 pregnant women, 292 of whom were exposed to dengue during pregnancy. For miscarriage, the OR was 3åá51 (95 percent CI 1åá15-10åá77, I2=0åá0 percent, p=0åá765) for women with dengue infection during pregnancy compared with those without. We did not do a meta-analysis for stillbirth because this outcome was investigated in only one study with a comparison group; we calculated the crude relative risk to be 6åá7 (95 percent CI 2åá1-21åá3) in women with symptomatic dengue compared with women without dengue. Preterm birth and low birthweight were the most common adverse pregnancy outcomes. The OR for the association with dengue was 1åá71 (95 percent CI 1åá06-2åá76,I2=56åá1 percent, p=0åá058) for preterm birth and 1åá41 (95 percent CI 0åá90-2åá21, I2=0åá0 percent, p=0åá543) for low birthweight.Interpretation----Evidence suggests that symptomatic dengue during pregnancy might be associated with fetal adverse outcomes. If confirmed, it would be important to monitor pregnancies during which dengue is diagnosed and to consider pregnant women in dengue control policies.--Communicated by: ProMED-PORT <promed-port@promedmail.org>[Our attention recently has been fixed on effects of Zika virus infections on the developing fetus. Little attention has been focused large scale on the dengue viruses, also flaviviruses. One hopes that the above study will stimulate further prospective studies to define effects of dengue viruses on the developing fetus. - Mod.TY]
