WHO Weekly Epidemiological Record WER [edited]<http://www.who.int/wer/2016/wer9111/en/>The development of candidate influenza vaccine viruses (CVVs), coordinated by WHO remains an essential component of the overall global strategy for pandemic preparedness.Selection and development of CVVs are the 1st steps towards timely vaccine production; they do not imply any recommendation for initiating manufacture. National authorities may consider the use of one or more of the CVVs for pilot lot vaccine production, clinical trials and other pandemic preparedness purposes based on their assessment of public health risk and need.Zoonotic influenza viruses continue to be identified and often evolve both genetically and antigenically, leading to the need for CVVs for pandemic preparedness purposes. Changes in the genetic and antigenic characteristics of these viruses relative to existing CVVs, and the potential risks for public health, necessitate the selection and development of new CVVs.This report summarizes the genetic and antigenic characteristics of recently characterized zoonotic influenza viruses and related viruses circulating in animals that are relevant for CVV updates. Institutions interested in receiving these CVVs should contact WHO at <gisrs-whohq@who.int> or the institutions listed in announcements published on the WHO website.Influenza A(H5)----------Since their re-emergence in 2003, highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) viruses of the A/goose/Guangdong/1/96 haemagglutinin (HA) lineage have become enzootic in some countries, have infected wild birds and continue to cause outbreaks in poultry and sporadic human infections. These viruses have diversified genetically and antigenically, including the emergence of viruses with substitutions of the N1 gene for N2, N3, N6, N8 or N9 genes, leading to the need for multiple CVVs. This summary provides updates on the characterization of A/goose/Guangdong/1/96-lineage A(H5) viruses and the current status of the development of influenza A(H5) CVVs.Influenza A(H5) activity [from 22 Sep 2015 to 22 Feb 2016]-----------------------A(H5) human infections have been reported to WHO by Bangladesh (1 case) and China (6 cases) where A(H5) infections have also been detected in birds. The human infection in Bangladesh and one of those in China were caused by A(H5N1) viruses; the remainder of the infections were caused by A(H5N6) viruses. A(H5) viruses were detected in birds in Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, C̫te d'Ivoire, Egypt, Ghana, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China, India, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Nigeria, Republic of Korea and Viet NamAntigenic and genetic characteristics of influenza A(H5) viruses------------------------The nomenclature for phylogenetic relationships among the HA genes of A/goose/Guangdong/1/96-lineage A(H5) viruses is defined in consultation with representatives of WHO, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and academic institutions. Viruses circulating and characterized from 22 Sep 2015 to 22 Feb 2016 belonged to the following clades:Clade 2.2.1.2 viruses were detected in poultry in Egypt. The viruses were genetically similar to viruses detected in previous periods. Antigenic data for these viruses are being generated.Clade 2.3.2.1a viruses were detected in birds and in a human in Bangladesh and in birds in India. The HA genes of the viruses from Bangladesh were similar to those previously characterized and the majority of the avian viruses reacted well with ferret antiserum raised against A/duck/Bangladesh/19097/2013 for which a CVV has been developed. No virus isolate is available from the human infection. The HA gene of the virus from India was genetically distinct; no antigenic data are available for this virus and the extent to which similar viruses circulate is unknown.Clade 2.3.2.1c viruses were detected in birds in Cambodia, China, C̫te d'Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria and Viet Nam. The HA genes from these viruses were similar to those of viruses previously detected. The viruses from southeast Asia remained antigenically similar to A/duck/VietNam/NCVD-1584/2012 from which a CVV has been developed. The HA genes of the viruses from Africa and from viruses detected in wild birds in China have accumulated a number of amino acid substitutions relative to A/duck/Viet Nam/NCVD-1584/2012. Characterization of the African viruses is ongoing to determine whether these genetic differences are associated with an antigenic change. No information was available for recent viruses from Indonesia.Clade 2.3.4.4 viruses were detected in birds in Lao People's Democratic Republic, Republic of Korea and Viet Nam, and in birds, environmental samples and humans in China. There was considerable genetic heterogeneity among the HA genes of these viruses (Figure 1 in the document) and some, including recent A(H5N6) viruses from Viet Nam, reacted poorly with post-infection ferret antiserum raised to the CVVs developed from A/Sichuan/ 26221/2014 (H5N6) and A/gyrfalcon/Washington/41088-6/2014 (H5N8) (Table 2).Influenza A(H5) candidate vaccine viruses------------------Based on the available antigenic, genetic and epidemiologic data, a new A/chicken/Viet Nam/NCVD-15A59/2015-like CVV is proposed. The available and pending A(H5) CVVs are listed in Table 3. As the viruses continue to evolve, new A(H5) CVVs may be developed.Influenza A(H7N9)-----------------Influenza A(H7) viruses have been detected in poultry populations worldwide with the associated disease ranging from mild to severe. Human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses were 1st reported to WHO on 31 Mar 2013.Influenza A(H7N9) activity[from 22 Sep 2015 to 22 Feb 2016]------During this period, 44 human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus infection were reported to WHO, all from China, bringing the total number of cases to 721 with 286 deaths, 4 reported. Recent A(H7N9) viruses were genetically similar to those detected previously. Comparison of human and avian viruses using haemagglutination inhibition (HI) assays showed that the majority of those tested remained antigenically similar to the CVVs derived from A/Anhui/1/2013-like and A/Shanghai/2/2013-like viruses.Influenza A(H7N9) candidate vaccine viruses-------------------------------------Based on the current epidemiologic and virologic data, no new A(H7N9) CVVs are proposed. Available A(H7N9) CVVs are shown in Table 4. As the viruses continue to evolve, new A(H7N9) CVVs may be developed.Influenza A(H9N2)-----------------Influenza A(H9N2) viruses are enzootic in poultry populations in parts of Africa, Asia and the Middle East. The majority of viruses that have been sequenced belong to the A/quail/Hong Kong/G1/97 (G1), A/chicken/Beijing/1/94 (Y280/G9), or Eurasian clades. Since 1998, when the 1st human infection was detected, the isolation of A(H9N2) viruses from humans and swine has been reported infrequently. In all but one human case, the associated disease symptoms have been mild, and there has been no evidence of human-to-human transmission.Influenza A(H9N2) activity [from 22 Sep 2015 to 22 Feb 2016]-------Six human cases of A(H9N2) infection have been reported in this period, with no fatalities. Five A(H9N2) viruses were isolated from humans in China. One of these viruses was associated with severe disease, although underlying conditions likely contributed to this. Genetically and antigenically, the tested viruses were similar to Y280-lineage A(H9N2) viruses known to circulate in birds in China. One A(H9N2) human case was detected in Bangladesh. Although no virus was isolated from this individual, sequencing of clinical material showed that the HA gene of the infecting virus was similar to A/Bangladesh/994/2011, for which a CVV has been produced.Influenza A(H9N2) candidate vaccine viruses----------------------------Based on the current antigenic, genetic and epidemiologic data, no new CVVs are proposed. The available A(H9N2) CVVs are listed in Table 5. As the viruses continue to evolve, new A(H9N2) CVVs may be developed.Influenza A(H1N1) variants (v)------------------------Influenza A(H1N1) viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Depending on geographic location, the genetic characteristics of these viruses differ. Human infections with swine A(H1) viruses have been documented for many years.Influenza A(H1N1)v activity [from 22 Sep 2015 to 22 Feb 2016]-------A non-fatal A(H1N1)v human case was detected in the United States of America (USA) during October [2015] in a patient with reported exposure to swine. Virus was not recovered from this case. Genomic sequences obtained from clinical specimen confirmed that the HA gene belonged to the classical swine gamma lineage but was genetically distant from the A(H1N1)pdm09 vaccine virus, A/California/7/2009, and the A(H1N1)v CVV, A/Ohio/9/2015. Two cases of Eurasian (EA) lineage avian-like A(H1N1)v viruses were identified in China during this reporting period. These cases were detected in different cities in Yunnan Province during November 2015. The HA genes of viruses recovered, A/Yunnan-Longyang/SWL1982/2015 and A/Yunnan-Wuhua/SWL1869/2015, grouped with those of swine influenza viruses circulating in China and a previously reported A(H1N1)v detected in China, A/Hunan/42443/2015 (Figure 2). Results of HI testing of these viruses are not yet available. Due to the lack of an existing CVV representing these EA lineage viruses, a new CVV is proposed.Influenza A(H1)v candidate vaccine viruses------------------------------------Based on the available genetic and epidemiologic data, a A/Hunan/42443/2015-like CVV is proposed (Table 6). As the viruses continue to evolve, new A(H1)v CVVs may be developed.Influenza A(H3N2)v-----------------Influenza A(H3N2) viruses are enzootic in swine populations in most regions of the world. Depending on geographic location, the genetic and antigenic characteristics of these viruses differ. Human infections with swine A(H3N2) viruses have been documented in Asia, Europe and North America.Influenza A(H3N2)v activity [from 22 Sep 2015 to 22 Feb 2016]---------One case of A(H3N2)v was identified in the USA during this reporting period. The individual from New Jersey developed illness in December [2015] and recovered following oseltamivir treatment. Virus isolated from the patient, A/New Jersey/53/2015, belonged to cluster IV-A6 and was related to swine viruses circulating in the USA during 2014-2015. Despite some genetic diversity between this virus and the closest A(H3N2)v CVV, A/Minnesota/11/2010 (NYMC X-203), it was well-inhibited by ferret antisera raised against A/Minnesota/11/2010. In addition, reactivity of this virus to pooled human sera collected from adults post-vaccination with the 2015-2016 seasonal influenza vaccine was comparable to other A(H3N2)v viruses and recent seasonal A(H3N2) vaccine viruses.Influenza A(H3N2)v candidate vaccine viruses-------------------------------Based on the available antigenic, genetic and epidemiologic data, no new A(H3N2)v CVVs are proposed. The available A(H3N2)v CVVs are listed in Table 7. As the viruses continue to evolve, new A(H3N2)v CVVs may be developed.We acknowledge the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) which provides the mechanism for detecting and monitoring emerging zoonotic influenza viruses. We thank the National Influenza Centres of GISRS who contributed information, clinical specimens and viruses, and associated data; WHO Collaborating Centres of GISRS for their in-depth characterization and comprehensive analysis of viruses; and WHO H5 Reference Laboratories for their complementary analyses. We thank the OIE/FAO Network of Expertise on Animal Influenza (OFFLU) and other national institutions for contributing information on viruses from animals. We also acknowledge the Global Initiative on Sharing Avian Influenza Data (GISAID) for the EpiFlu database and other sequence databases which were used to share gene sequences and associated information.The document contains tables summarizing the antigenic analysis using the haemagglutination inhibition(HI) assay as well as phylogenetic trees for various circulating clades of the zoonotic influenza viruses.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides a comprehensive review of the zoonotic influenza viruses that are currently circulating in animals and have demonstrated the capacity to infect humans causing a wide range of illness from mild to severe disease.The report also provides updates on the composition, current status and available candidate vaccine viruses for these novel strains, should the need arise for mass production in future. - Mod.UBA]
