Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/human-metapneumovirus-outbreak-at-herberton-hospital-final-report-released-83002/>The final report into the human metapneumovirus (hMPV) outbreak at Herberton Hospital has found Cairns and Hinterland Hospital and Health Service (CHHHS) responded promptly and appropriately to the issue. The Department of Health released the chief health officer's final report on Tuesday [15 Mar 2016].Seven patients of Herberton Hospital, a 38-bed aged and palliative care facility, died this year [2016] following the outbreak. A review was initiated following concerns raised with the response to the initial outbreak. The outbreak was declared over on 18 Feb 2016.Chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young said her investigation found CHHHS implemented appropriate infection control measures to minimise the risk of transmission following laboratory confirmation of the outbreak. ""The care of patients at Herberton Hospital was compliant with the relevant legislation, accreditation standards, policies and procedures,"" Dr Young said. ""Additionally CHHHS' response to the outbreak did not contribute to any increased level of risk to the local community.""Based on the evidence considered in the course of the investigation, Dr Young has made a number of recommendations to be considered by similar facilities. ""I have recommended that facilities work to increase rates of annual influenza vaccination for staff and patients in all health facilities, particularly facilities that provide care for immunocompromised and vulnerable patients (such as the elderly),"" she said. ""Consistent, regular and easily accessible advice should also be provided to staff and visitors not to attend care facilities when they have cold or flu-like symptoms to help minimise the potential risk of the spread of infection to staff, patients, and other visitors.""Dr Young also recommended local isolation procedures be determined in advance of an outbreak, with pre-identified triggers, notification processes, isolation areas, and staffing practices. However, she said the ability of each facility to effectively isolate and cohort patients was highly dependent on the physical design and available infrastructure. ""Options and effectiveness may be limited by the requirements of patients, for example those with dementia. Isolating or moving these patients may result in distress and risk of poor clinical outcomes,"" she said.Dr Young said adequate infection control was also essential, including restricting admissions, discharges, or inter-facility transfers during a suspected or confirmed outbreak. ""Hand hygiene and droplet precaution practices should be ingrained in facility procedures with widespread and simple access to hand hygiene facilities and tissues, and availability of appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) such as face masks, as needed,"" she said.Dr Young extended her thanks to those who participated in the investigation, particularly staff from Tropical Public Health Services (Cairns) and Herberton Hospital. ""I also offer my sincere thanks to the families of residents of Herberton Hospital who took the time to meet with me,"" she said. ""The deaths are a sad event and my condolences go out to those affected.""--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) is a single negative-stranded RNA-enveloped virus classified in the _Pneumovirinae_ subfamily of the _Paramyxoviridae_ family. This virus is second only to respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) as the most commonly identified cause of pediatric lower respiratory illness. However, hMPV can also cause upper respiratory tract infections across all age groups (<http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/237691-overview>).Infection with hMPV causes a broad spectrum of respiratory illness, from mild symptoms to severe cough, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia. The clinical symptoms are similar to those seen with RSV infection and may also include high fever, myalgia (muscle pain), rhinorrhea (runny nose), dyspnea (laboured breathing), tachypnea (abnormally fast breathing), and wheezing. Bronchiolitis, with or without pneumonia, is the commonest presentation of hMPV illness along with exacerbation of existing asthma or COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).Reinfections with hMPV occur throughout adult life and hMPV infection has been documented in 1-9 per cent of adults each year using RT-PCR and serology for diagnosis. Illness is generally mild in young adults with serologic evidence of asymptomatic infection in many cases. Adults at highest risk of serious sequelae as a result of hMPV include the elderly, adults with underlying pulmonary disease, and those who are immunocompromised. Outbreaks of hMPV have been documented in long term care facilities with mortality of up to 50 per cent in frail elderly residents (<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18820584>).The most sensitive and timely method for hMPV diagnosis is molecular: polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of respiratory secretions. Other methods include enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA), and/or immunofluorescence testing.As mentioned in the report above, in elderly care facilities it is best to provide influenza vaccination not only to the patients/residents but also to the staff working there. Furthermore, routine testing for hMPV in adults with pneumonia must be done when the virus is known to be circulating, because early recognition may aid in limiting transmission of hMPV, particularly to immunocompromised hosts. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/51820>.]
