The World Weekly [edited]<http://www.theworldweekly.com/reader/view/newswire/2016-03-21/hundreds-wanted-across-china-over-illegal-vaccines-scandal/7188>Chinese authorities have made public their search for over 300 suspects involved in the distribution of illegal vaccines. Those wanted have allegedly either bought from or sold vaccines to a business run by a mother and daughter in Shandong province. The illegal ring has affected people in 24 provinces and cities and involves nearly USD 88 million worth of vaccines.The vaccines are understood to be unsafe as they were not appropriately refrigerated or transported, leading to fears that they could have dangerous side-effects and may even cause disability or death, China's state Xinhua news agency reported. Affected vaccines include polio, rabies, mumps, encephalitis, hepatitis B and meningococcal diseases.The mother and daughter at the centre of the scandal were arrested in April last year [2015]. They appear to have been bulk selling 25 types of vaccines for both adults and children since 2010. The mother and daughter reportedly purchased the vaccines from both licensed and unlicensed sources, later selling their stock on to illegal agents or local disease control centres for high prices.Social media condemnation of the government's scandal has been rife, with one user on Sina Weibo comparing the situation to ""genocide"". Another was outraged by the government's handling of the case, stating that, ""not a single regulatory official has come out to apologise... This system doesn't care whether ordinary citizens live or die.""The mother formerly worked as a pharmacist in Heze, Shandong. She was well known for her relationships with pharmaceutical firms. Her daughter is a medical school graduate. In 2009, she was given a 3 year suspended sentence for illegally selling vaccines, local media report.Authorities have known about the ring since last April [2015], though it is not clear why details of the suspects have only just been released. Beijing assures the public that vaccines administered from regulated centres in the city are safe. Moreover, the Shandong food and drug administration has vowed to ""severely punish all those found to have violated the law"". On Monday [21 Mar 2016], news broke that a boy had died after a vaccination, though there has been no confirmation that his death is linked to the scandal.The South China Morning Post details the specific regions affected by the scandal.China does not let those involved in such medical scandals off lightly. In 2009, the government sentenced to death 2 men involved in the contamination of baby milk with a dangerous chemical. A woman involved in the scandal was also sentenced to life imprisonment.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[According to a related news report <http://www.theworldweekly.com/reader/view/newswire/2016-03-21/hundreds-wanted-across-china-over-illegal-vaccines-scandal/7188>, the 24 provinces/cities affected by the illegal/substandard vaccine distribution are Anhui, Beijing, Fujian, Gansu, Guangdong, Guangxi, Guizhou, Hebei, Henan, Heilongjiang, Hubei, Jilin, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Chongqing, Zhejiang, Sichuan, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Shandong, Hunan, Liaoning, Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang.Most commonly recommended vaccines require storage temperatures of 35-46 F (2-8 C) and must not be exposed to freezing temperatures. However, certain exceptions include varicella vaccine and live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV), which must be stored in a continuously frozen state under 5 F (-15 C) with no freeze-thaw cycles (1). In recent years, instances of improper vaccine storage have been reported. An estimated 17-37 per cent of providers expose vaccines to improper storage temperatures, and refrigerator temperatures are more commonly kept too cold than too warm [2,3].The vaccine cold chain is for ensuring maintenance of a temperature-controlled environment used to maintain and distribute vaccines in optimal condition. It begins with the cold storage unit at the manufacturing plant, extends through transport of vaccine(s) to the distributor, then delivery and storage at the provider facility, and ends with administration of vaccine to the patient. Appropriate storage conditions must be maintained at every link in the cold chain to ensure vaccine efficacy and integrity.Failure to store and handle vaccines properly can reduce vaccine potency, resulting in inadequate immune responses in patients and poor protection against diseases. Patients lose confidence in vaccines and their providers when re-vaccination becomes necessary because the vaccine(s) they received may have been compromised (exposed to inappropriate conditions/temperatures or handled improperly).It is imperative, in order to build public confidence in the beneficial effect of these vaccines for preventing disease, that all aspects of vaccine distribution, storage, cold chain maintenance, and proper administration are ensured through proper regulatory oversight and prompt corrective action.References:1. <http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/storage/toolkit/storage-handling-toolkit.pdf>2. Gazmararian JA, Oster NV, Green DC, et al. Vaccine storage practices in primary care physician offices. Am J Prev Med 2002;23:246--53.3. Bell KN, Hogue CJ, Manning C, Kendal AP. Risk factors for improper vaccine storage and handling in private provider offices. Pediatrics 2001;107:E100. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>.]
