Myanmar Times [edited]<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/national-news/mandalay-upper-myanmar/19460-meningococcal-outbreak-claims-four-lives.html>Health authorities are on high alert following a recent meningococcal meningitis outbreak that has claimed the lives of 4 children in Mandalay Region. 2 children in a serious condition are being treated for the bacterial infection at Mandalay General Hospital, while 5 more children are receiving treatment at Meiktila General Hospital. All are from villages in Tharsi Township.Dr Win Naing, head of the Department of Public Health in Mandalay Region, said health officials were taking preventative measures to control the outbreak. They have started a vaccination campaign and advised people in the affected area to avoid large crowds. ""We are doing fieldwork in the area where the patients live and other locations nearby,"" he said. ""We are monitoring around the clock for any further outbreaks in the area.""The cases were reported from [5 Mar 2016], when the 1st death was reported. Another child died on [7 Mar 2016], while 2 more passed away on [9 Mar 2016]. The most recent cases were detected in Aung Myin Thar village on [12 Mar 2016], with 2 suspected patients immediately taken for medical treatment, according to the Department of Public Health.U Myint Thein, a senior National League for Democracy official in Tharsi Township, said 2 patients had been transferred to Mandalay due to the severity of their illness. ""Today we went to see the patients at Meiktila Hospital. The 5 children ... are in a stable condition,"" he said.Tests of the blood samples taken from infected children confirmed that the meningitis had been caused by the _Neisseria meningitidis_ group B bacteria, one of 6 serotypes that can cause an outbreak.The deaths have been attributed to delays in seeking treatment. Dr Win Naing said it was essential that anyone suspected of having the highly fatal disease present for treatment as soon as possible. ""Meningitis tends to happen in the early summer season because ... the disease can be transmitted in dusty places,"" Dr Win Naing said. ""It is most commonly found in dry zone areas, such as Mandalay and Magwe."" He added that outbreaks of the vaccine-preventable disease have occurred seasonally since 1992. ""People need to look out for the symptoms and if they notice any people with them then they should be reported to the health department,"" he said. ""They should also avoid areas with large numbers of people and use a face mask when in a dusty place.""Meningococcal meningitis is transmitted person-to-person via mucus, particularly through coughing and sneezing, or sharing eating or drinking utensils. The infection affects the lining around the brain and spinal cord. According to the World Health Organization, the commonest symptoms are a stiff neck, high fever, sensitivity to light, confusion, headaches, and vomiting.About 20 per cent of infected people do not show symptoms, but can act as carriers within the community, according to Dr Win Naing. Even with early treatment, 5 to 10 per cent of cases are fatal, typically within 24 to 48 hours after symptoms appear. Between 10 and 20 per cent of survivors suffer from brain damage, hearing loss or a learning disability. Without immediate antibiotic treatment, the disease is fatal in closer to 50 per cent of cases.In order to control the spread of the outbreak, Dr Win Naing said the region health department has been vaccinating family members of affected children, and anyone else who may have been in close contact with the patients. Adjacent villages have been warned to be on the lookout for the disease and to avoid festivals, donation ceremonies or other events where crowds may congregate. The health officials also recommended sprinkling water over dirt roads to limit dust.""Any age can suffer from the disease, but children whose resistance is weak are at highest risk to be infected,"" Dr Win Naing said. Meningitis is considered a leading cause of death of children under five in Myanmar.[byline: Myint Kay Thi, Kyaw Ko Ko]--communicated by:ProMED-MBDS from HealthMap Alerts<promed-mbds@promedmail.org>[The news report above says that 11 children, 4 of whom have died, developed bacterial meningitis due to _Neisseria meningitidis_ serogroup B in the first 2 weeks of March 2016. All are from Tharsi Township in the Mandalay Region of central Myanmar. The news report says that family members and other close contacts of affected children are being vaccinated in order to control the spread of the outbreak. However, we are not told which meningococcal vaccine is being used.Several meningococcal vaccines are available. Immunity following use of a meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine is specific for the type of capsular polysaccharide that the vaccine contains, with no cross-protection against infection due to other meningococcal polysaccharide groups. Although there are at least 13 _N. meningitidis_ serogroups, based on the antigenic specificity of their capsular polysaccharides, disease due to serogroups A, B, C, Y, and W135 are the commonest.There are vaccines that contain capsular polysaccharide (A, C, Y, W135), either alone or conjugated to protein. Conjugate vaccines are preferable, because, unlike the polysaccharide vaccines, conjugate vaccines immunize infants, reduce the carriage of meningococci in the throat and thus its transmission, as well as confer a more sustained immune response, and, therefore, longer-term protection than the polysaccharide vaccines.Serogroup B vaccines have been developed based upon meningococcal B protein antigens, because group B polysaccharide is poorly immunogenic in humans and is a potential auto-antigen. Bexsero and Trumenba are 2 new serogroup B vaccines approved for use in the US. ProMED-mail would appreciate knowing the vaccine being used to control the outbreak in Mandalay from knowledgeable sources. - Mod.MLMaps of Myanmar can be seen at <http://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/map/myanmar_map2.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/16960>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
