Disease outbreak news[edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/23-march-2016-ah5n6-china/en/>Human infection with avian influenza A(H5N6) virus -- China-----------------------------------------------------------On 15 Mar 2016, the National Health and Family Planning Commission (NHFPC) of China notified WHO of one additional laboratory-confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N6) virus.A 40 year old woman who lives in Huizhou City, Guangdong Province developed fever and cough on [20 Feb 2016]. She was admitted to a local hospital on [22 Feb 2016] and is now in critical condition. On [15 Mar 2016], Guangdong CDC performed a validation test of her sample and this was confirmed to be H5N6 virus nucleic acid positive. Close contacts of this case remain healthy.Public health response----------------------The Chinese Government has taken the following surveillance and control measures:- strengthening surveillance, analysis and research;- further enhancing the medical care of the case;- conducting public risk communication and releasing information.WHO risk assessment-------------------This report does not change the overall public health risk from avian influenza A(H5N6) viruses. Although influenza A(H5N6) has caused severe infection in humans, until now human infections with the virus seem to be sporadic with no ongoing human to human transmission and close contacts of the case remain healthy. However, the characterization of this virus is ongoing and its implication to the evolution and emergence of a pandemic strain is unknown. The risk of international disease spread is considered to be low at this point in time. WHO continues to assess the epidemiological situation and conduct further risk assessment based on the latest information.WHO advice----------WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid poultry farms, contact with animals in live bird markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travellers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, in order to ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Zhejiang, Fujian, Jiangsu: H7N9, WHODate: Wed 23 Mar 2016Source: Disease Outbreak News[edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/23-march-2016-avian-ah7n9-china/en/>Human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus -- China-----------------------------------------------------------On 18 Mar 2016, the National Health and Family Planning Commission (NHFPC) of China notified WHO of 29 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus, including 11 deaths.Onset dates range from [17 Jan 2016 to 19 Feb 2016]. Cases range in age from 21 to 78 years, with a median age of 57 years. Of these 29 cases, 22 (76 per cent) are male. The majority (24 cases, 83 per cent) reported exposure to live poultry, slaughtered poultry, or live poultry markets; the exposure history of 5 cases is unknown or with no clear exposure to poultry. Cases were reported from 6 provinces and municipalities: Zhejiang (7), Hunan (7), Jiangsu (6), Guangdong (4), Fujian (3), and Shanghai (2).A total of 3 clusters were reported:The 1st cluster consists of 2, 35 year old men (twin brothers) from Jiangsu Province, the onset dates are respectively [19 Jan 2016] and [1 Feb 2016]. Both have no clear known history of exposure to poultry. The 2nd cluster consists of a 29 year old man from Zhejiang Province and a 56 year old woman (son and mother) from Fujian Province. The onset dates are [4 Feb 2016] and [15 Feb 2016], respectively. Both have history of exposure to live poultry market. The 3rd cluster consists of a 21 year old woman and a 26 year old man (sister and brother) both from Jiangsu Province, the onset dates are [14 Feb 2016 and 19 Feb 2016], respectively. The brother reported exposure to live poultry. The sister took care of her brother and has no known history of exposure to poultry.Public health response----------------------The Chinese Government has taken the following surveillance and control measures:- strengthening surveillance, analysis and research;- further enhancing the medical care of the case;- conducting public risk communication and releasing information.WHO risk assessment-------------------Most human cases are exposed to the A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, further human cases can be expected. Although small clusters of human cases with influenza A(H7N9) viruses have been reported previously including those involving healthcare workers, current epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. Therefore further community level spread is considered unlikely.Human infections with the A(H7N9) virus are unusual and need to be monitored closely in order to identify changes in the virus and/or its transmission behaviour to humans as it may have a serious public health impact. WHO continues to assess the epidemiological situation and conduct further risk assessment based on the latest information.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[China has reported the majority of the human cases of avian influenza, both H7N9 and H5N6 subtypes, which indicates that there are incidents of successful animal to human transfer/transmission, thereby providing these novel viruses opportunities to evolve in human hosts and possibly transmit better in future. Who knows?But the other important fact here is that the surveillance system is able to detect these cases and identify the responsible influenza virus quite robustly, an example of pandemic preparedness through ongoing seasonal and novel influenza surveillance and monitoring activities. - Mod.UBAMaps of China can be seen at <http://www.sacu.org/maps/provmap.png> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
