Journal-News [edited]<http://www.journal-news.net/page/content.detail/id/654314/Cholera-contained-in-Jefferson-County.html?nav=5006>Officials with the Jefferson County [West Virginia] Health Department say there is no public health risk following a reported case of cholera earlier in March 2016. Dr. David Didden, health officer with the Jefferson County Health Department, said the health department was contacted on 4 Mar 2016 by state officials who said a female foodservice worker in Jefferson County had contracted cholera.""The patient was seen at Jefferson Medical Center on 1 Mar 2016, and a urine sample tested positive for cholera,"" Didden said. ""It's not unusual for germs that inhabit your bowels to show up in a urine sample, but it took 2 or 3 days for the urine culture to grow and the lab technicians to identify it as cholera."" In such a situation, Didden said, the lab must send their report of the disease to state health officials, who then notify the local health department.The CDC states that an estimated 3 million to 5 million cases of cholera and more than 100 000 deaths from the disease occur each year around the world. Didden said cholera outbreaks typically take place in developing countries without proper drinking water treatment and sanitation. ""The CDC and World Health Organization say that almost all cases of cholera in the U.S. involve travel to areas still endemic with cholera. If someone returns from or eats food from a country where cholera is present, they can get it,"" Didden said. ""The CDC reported 70 cases of cholera in the U.S. in 2012, and all of them are suspected to be foreign travel-related.""Didden said antimicrobials can reduce the risk of transmitting the disease and can reduce the duration of symptoms by about one day. The most important thing for a person infected with cholera to do is to stay hydrated, he said.The Jefferson County cholera patient worked in the foodservice industry, but Didden said she was too sick to work while she was having active symptoms. He said she worked for one day once she began feeling better, but said she is not currently working. ""The (health department's) environmental services staff work closely with the restaurant where she works, and they said she practiced safe food handling procedures and no food was contaminated. Right now, she's not working, and we are legally bound to restrict her from working until she can give three negative urine samples,"" Didden said.Didden said the patient recently submitted 3 urine samples that tested positive for cholera, and submitted 3 more samples early this week. He said the health department is still awaiting the results from the most recent urine samples.[Byline: Mary Stortstrom]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There are a number of hazy features of this case:What symptoms were present, diarrhea or urinary tract symptoms? Was the organism also isolated from the patient's stool? If this is truly cholera, what serotype was found?Extra-intestinal epidemic cholera (serotypes O1 or O139) infections are very rare but can occur in non-O1, non-O139 infections as reported below:Chowdhury G, Joshi S, Bhattacharya S, et al: Extraintestinal infections caused by non-toxigenic Vibrio cholerae non-O1/non-O139. Front Microbiol. 2016 Feb 11;7:144. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00144Abstract_Vibrio cholerae_ is an aerobic, sucrose fermentative Gram-negative bacterium that generally prevails in the environment. Pathogenic _V. cholerae_ is well-known as causative agent of acute diarrhea. Apart from enteric infections, _V. cholerae_ may also cause other diseases. However, their role in causing extraintestinal infections is not fully known as it needs proper identification and evaluation. Four cases of extraintestinal infections due to _V. cholerae_ non-O1/non-O139 have been investigated. The isolates were screened for phenotypic and genetic characteristics with reference to their major virulence genes. Serologically distinct isolates harbored rtx, msh, and hly but lacked enteric toxin encoding genes that are generally present in toxigenic _V. cholerae_. Timely detection of this organism can prevent fatalities in hospital settings. The underlying virulence potential of _V. cholerae_ needs appropriate testing and intervention. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/249>.]
