New England Journal of Medicine, Journal Watch [edited]<http://www.jwatch.org/fw111351/2016/03/24/who-zika-circulating-38-countries-linked-guillain-barr-12>The Zika virus is currently circulating in 38 countries and territories, WHO director-general Margaret Chan said in a media briefing on [Tue 22 Mar 2016]. Of these, 12 have reported an increase in Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome [GBS] or laboratory evidence of Zika among GBS patients.In addition, the virus has now been linked to microcephaly in Panama, and Colombia is examining a potential link to microcephaly cases there. To date, Brazil has confirmed over 900 cases of Zika-linked microcephaly, according to news reports. In other areas, the virus hasn't been circulating long enough to see potential effects in term pregnancies.Dr Chan said, ""There is now scientific consensus that Zika virus is implicated in these neurological disorders,"" although the link ""is not yet scientifically proven."" 14 teams in 5 countries are working on vaccines, she said.[byline: Amy Orciari Herman, edited by Susan Sadoughi, Richard Saitz]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This situation is rapidly changing as the outbreak expands and surveillance increases. Expect increases in the numbers of GBS cases in the near future. - Mod.TY]******[3] Zika virus in AfricaDate: Thu 17 Mar 2016Source: Health Security ahead of print. doi:10.1089/hs.2016.0033 [edited]<http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/hs.2016.0033>[ref: Lucey DR. Will Zika virus and microcephaly epidemics emerge after Ebola in West Africa? The need for prospective studies nowHealth Secur. 2016. [Epub ahead of print]----------------------------------------------------------------------In March 2016, research groups in Brazil and the United States reported that Zika virus (ZIKV) of African lineage (Uganda strain ""MR 766"") can infect and kill human cortical neural progenitor cells and block their normal growth and development. Small numbers of ZIKV infections have been documented in Nigeria, Senegal, Uganda, and elsewhere in Africa since the 1950s. ZIKV has not been reported to be associated with microcephaly following these small outbreaks, although widespread surveillance has not been done. Nevertheless, given the much larger epidemics of ZIKV and microcephaly in Brazil in 2015 and 2016, these 2 in vitro studies are concerning enough to warrant prospective studies monitoring for microcephaly following ZIKV outbreaks in Africa.According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the West African island nation of Cabo (Cape) Verde experienced an epidemic of Zika virus involving more than 7000 persons starting in October 2015, approximately 1 month after the estimated start of the ZIKV epidemic in Colombia. It has not yet been published whether the epidemic in Cabo Verde is due to ZIKV of African lineage or to the Asian lineage causing the panepidemics across Latin America and the Caribbean.As of 8 Mar 2016, the WHO reported microcephaly linked to an Asian lineage strain of ZIKV only in French Polynesia in 2014 and in Brazil in 2015-16. Given the normal timeline of pregnancy, a microcephaly epidemic linked to ZIKV could occur in Colombia by May-June 2016 and begin by that time in Cabo Verde. Preparedness for, and early recognition of, a microcephaly epidemic in Cabo Verde would benefit from prospective clinical-epidemiologic studies of pregnant women with ZIKV infection, as have been done in Colombia since December 2015. Such studies in Cabo Verde would be of benefit, whether the ZIKV strain causing their epidemic is proven to be due to African lineage or Asian lineage.In addition to prospective studies monitoring for microcephaly, surveillance for ZIKV infection itself could be of benefit in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, as well as other nations in West Africa such as Guinea-Bissau, which has close travel links with Cabo Verde. The clinical presentation of ZIKV infection, although extremely mild compared with typical Ebola virus disease, could cause initial confusion clinically because both can have fever, muscle and joint pain, red eyes, and rash. If a patient with ZIKV infection were to raise initial concern about a potential Ebola virus infection, then a cascade of unnecessary medical, public health, societal, and political issues could be triggered.Prospective surveillance for ZIKV in West Africa, including availability of rapid PCR testing, could have at least 3 potential benefits. 1st, it could facilitate the rapid diagnosis of ZIKV if it is present and allay the cascade of concerns about Ebola. 2nd, if ZIKV is confirmed, then the need for prospective studies of both ZIKV infections and the spectrum of microcephaly and congenital neurological abnormalities would be clear. Third, in patients with neurological abnormalities, such as Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome (GBS), testing for ZIKV could be performed to assess the GBS-ZIKV link and facilitate an estimate of the preparedness and response level needed for the intensive care that is sometimes required for patients with GBS. Similar preparedness efforts are being made now in parts of Latin America where ZIKA-associated GBS has been reported.In February 2016, WHO posted a comprehensive technical report that provided a risk assessment for ZIKV in the WHO African Region. Multiple factors were used to stratify nations by risk. Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea were included in either the high-risk or moderate risk category. Important recommendations were made for serosurveys, in part to help assess the degree of population immunity for both the African and Asian lineage ZIKV, and also for entomological studies. One of the main messages was: ""The association of congenital conditions with Zika virus infection, such as microcephaly and Guillain Barr̩ syndrome, still remains coincidental although on-going studies suggest a strong link. Monitoring of these disorders should be implemented as additional indicators of a possible Zika virus outbreak.""As the link between ZIKV, microcephaly, and a spectrum of neurological abnormalities has become stronger over the past month, however, this valuable and detailed technical report could be strengthened in practical terms by 3 updates: (1) an explicit strong recommendation for prospective epidemiologic studies to monitor for microcephaly following every known ZIKV outbreak, such as the one that already began in October 2015 in Cabo Verde; (2) explicit discussion of the potential confusion in initial differentiation of the clinical presentations of ZIKV infection and (mild) Ebola virus disease; and (3) making available rapid PCR testing for ZIKV as soon as possible in 2016, especially in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia, as well as Guinea-Bissau.--communicated by:Daniel R Lucey MD, MPHDivision of Infectious Diseases, Department of MedicineGeorgetown University Hospital Medical CenterWashington, DC 20057Georgetown University Medical and Law CentersProMED-mail consultant for Middle East (MENA) and South Asia<drl23@georgetown.edu>[It well could be that Zika virus infections are occurring in West Africa, but due to their clinical presentations similar to those of dengue and chikungunya viruses and to malaria, go undiagnosed. Prospective studies would be helpful to understand what the Zika virus infection situation is there. However, serologic surveys can be problematic due to the cross-reactivity among the flaviviruses. Ruling in or excluding Ebola virus infections would be very important. - Mod.TYMaps of Cape Verde can be seen at <http://www.nationsonline.org/maps/Cape-Verde-Map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/15>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
