LA Times [edited]<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-scope-outbreak-20160325-story.html>***[This is not recalling a post -- it reports cases occurring after the scopes were recalled. - ProMED]***Two patients died, and 6 more were sickened in a new outbreak suspected of being caused by contaminated medical scopes, according to a regulatory report by device manufacturer Olympus Corp.The report shows that hospitals are continuing to use a device that was recalled in January [2016], which experts have found to be extremely difficult to disinfect. The name and location of the hospital were not revealed in the report.""It's overwhelming,"" said [a parent] whose 19-year-old son nearly died after being sickened with a superbug from a scope at UCLA's Ronald Reagan Medical Center in late 2014. ""They've known about this for so long, and people are still dying.""In January [2016], a U.S. Senate investigation said that the device known as the duodenoscope had been linked to at least 25 outbreaks worldwide. Three of the outbreaks happened at Los Angeles-area hospitals, including Cedars-Sinai and UCLA, where 3 patients died.One day after the findings of the investigation were released, Olympus said it was recalling the reusable scope and replacing one of its internal mechanisms that could allow bacteria to remain trapped inside after cleaning.The scope that the hospital used to treat the 8 patients in the new report had not yet been sent back under Olympus' recall. Olympus said Friday [25 Mar 2016] that it had begun replacing the scopes, known as model number TJF-Q180V, in February [2016]. The company said it expects to have all 4400 scopes in use by hospitals and clinics recalled by August [2016].Lawrence Muscarella, a medical safety expert in Montgomeryville, Pa., said hospitals should be warning patients before each scope procedure about the risk of an untreatable infection and whether the hospital is still using a device involved in the recall. He said he has not seen those warnings in forms that hospitals require patients to sign before a scope procedure. Muscarella pointed out that the outbreak had been reported to the FDA by Olympus and not by the hospital. Under federal law, hospitals must file a report to the FDA within 10 days of becoming aware that a medical device had caused a death. The Senate investigation found that not one of the 16 or more American hospitals where patients were sickened appeared to have properly filed the required federal report.Muscarella said the secrecy surrounding the outbreaks means that the public probably will never know how many patients died from infections tied to the scopes. ""The number of patients infected and killed ... could be orders of magnitude higher,"" he said. In California, hospitals are required to report unusual events such as outbreaks to state health officials but face no financial penalty if they don't.Deborah Kotz, an FDA spokeswoman, said the agency could not disclose the name of the hospital. Federal law prohibits such disclosure to protect the privacy of patients' personal and medical files, she said. ""The FDA takes very seriously any deaths or serious injuries that are reported,"" Kotz said. The agency is examining each report that has been filed, she said, and requesting additional information when necessary.The duodenoscope is a long snakelike tube with a tiny camera on its tip. It is used nearly 700 000 times a year in the U.S. to treat cancer and other problems in the digestive tract. The procedure known as ERCP, or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, can avoid surgeries. Doctors also use the scope to diagnose conditions, a process that could be done in some cases with less invasive tests like an MRI.Tokyo-based Olympus sells 85% of the duodenoscopes used by American hospitals. The other manufacturers are Pentax and Fujifilm. Their scopes have also been linked to outbreaks. The FDA and Olympus have advised hospitals to take additional steps in cleaning the device to reduce the risk of infection. Yet hospitals are continuing to report that scopes remain contaminated after cleaning. In the latest report, the hospital had been using an automatic washer sold by Olympus to clean its scopes. The washer was returned to Olympus for evaluation, according to the report.Olympus said it was notified of the outbreak on 26 Jan [2016]. The company said the hospital was doing an autopsy on the 2 patients who died to determine their cause of death. Olympus said an independent lab found _Stenotrophomonas maltophilia_ -- dangerous bacteria that resists many antibiotics -- inside the scope's suction channel.The scope had been used almost 800 times by the hospital, the report said. It was purchased in June 2012 and last repaired by Olympus in August 2014. Olympus technicians found cracks in the device and brown stains inside, the company said in the report.[Byline: Melody Petersen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[In January 2016, ProMED-mail reported that Olympus Corp. said it would voluntarily recall and redesign a troubled duodenoscope (the TJF-Q180V duodenoscope) used for endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) that has been linked to scores of potentially deadly infections with antibiotic-resistant bacteria around the world (ProMED-mail post Antibiotic-resistant Enterobacteriaceae - USA: Olympus ERCP endoscopes, recall 20160116.3941747). These endoscopes can trap and transmit bacteria from patient to patient even after the endoscopes are cleaned by recommended procedures between use.Olympus Corp. manufactures about 85 percent of these duodenoscopes, but Pentax and Fuji manufacture similar duodenscopes that also have shown infection control problems. An Internet search fails to show whether the Pentax and Fuji endoscopes have also been recalled. However, the above news report says the endoscope involved in this new outbreak was the Olympus TJF-Q180V duodenoscope, used despite its recall notice.We are told that an independent lab found a non-Enterobacteriaceae Gram-negative bacillus _Stenotrophomonas maltophilia_ inside the endoscope's suction channel, but we are not told what organisms actually caused the infections in the 8 outbreak patients.For a discussion of problems with ERCP duodenoscopes, please see my comments in prior ProMED-mail posts on this subject listed below. - Mod.MLMore cases are inevitable before August 2016, when all Olympus scopes are scheduled to have been replaced. - Mod.JWA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
