Agence d'Information d'Afrique Central [in French, trans. CopyEd.LMI, edited]<http://www.adiac-congo.com/content/sante-pas-depidemie-de-la-fievre-jaune-en-rdc-47919>The public communication that the Minister of Public Health, Dr F̩lix Kabange Numbi made to the press on Monday evening [21 Mar 2016] cut short any rumor reports of yellow fever [epidemic] in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).""There is no outbreak of yellow fever in DRC; until now the country has not declared the epidemic. The 20 cases reported in the Central Congo Province came from Angola. 28 samples were taken from patients and 7 samples tested out positive. These 7 suspected cases are divided as follows: one case in Kimpese, 3 in Sona Mpangu, 2 in Matadi, and one on the outskirts of Matadi. The Kongo Central province did not report any indigenous case"", said the Public Health Minister.He also indicated that these 7 samples were sent to Dakar in Senegal for certification. However, the Minister of Public Health said, ""although Dakar confirmed the samples as positive, we will not declare the epidemic because they are imported cases from Angola. These are not cases from the DRC.""Even if the country is epidemic free, preventive measures are taken. Monitoring is reinforced at the borders. ""Measures are strengthened particularly in the provinces of Kongo Central, Kwango, Kasai, and Lualaba. Every traveler undergoes control. The Kongo Central province received yellow fever vaccines to vaccinate anyone who enters or leaves Angola and the DRC.""Yellow fever is a viral infectious disease caused by the yellow fever virus. The disease is spread from humans to human by the _Aedes_ mosquito, a spotted mosquito.The incubation period is short, 3-6 days. During this period, there are no apparent signs, but the virus multiplies in the body. At the end of this period the disease progresses in 2 phases: acute and toxic phases. In the 1st phase, the disease is compared to malaria with symptoms such as fever, back pain, signs of anorexia, and nausea. This phase lasts 3 to 4 days and the patient can fully recover. In the 2nd phase, the patient develops a fever accompanied by vomiting, bleeding from the mouth, nose, eyes, and stomach. The patient can also develop jaundice due to liver and kidney damage, which can lead to death.According to the Public Health Minister, there is no cure for this disease. Only vaccination protects against yellow fever. And this vaccine is readily available. In addition to getting vaccinated, the Public Health Minister calls on the community to clean up the environment. ""We must fight unsanitary conditions, clean up the environment by getting rid of stagnant water to stop the proliferation of mosquitoes, and sleep under mosquito nets to prevent mosquito bites.""Dr F̩lix Kabange Numbi also asked parents to respect their child's immunization schedule, which is the only preventive measure against this disease. To anyone willing to travel, the Minister advises: ""Get vaccinated and bring your immunization records with you. If you refuse to be vaccinated, you not only expose yourself but everyone else to the disease. Any health officer at the border who will deliver a vaccination card without having vaccinated the traveler will be severely punished.""[Byline: Aline Nzuzi]--Communicated by:Roland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[It is fortunate that no instances of ongoing transmission in the DRC from the cases imported from Angola have been detected. One hopes that there is adequate surveillance in the localities in the DRC where the positive YF cases have been reported, to detect any transmission and new cases should they occur. If local transmission is occurring, swift response is needed to intensify surveillance with laboratory support and mount a vaccination campaign in the affected area.Control at the DRC-Angola border s prudent. Because the Angola-DRC border is likely to be leaky, it is probable that additional infected individuals may cross into the DRC. The coordination of health officials on both sides of the border will be helpful in restricting the flow of infected individuals across the border. - Mod.TYKongo Central province is also known as Bas Congo (formerly Bas Zaire) and can be found on a map at <http://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/map/dr_congo_map.htm>. It borders Angola on its south and west, the Republic of Congo on its north, Kinshasa to its northeast, and Bandundu to its east. - Mod.MPPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the country can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40817>.Re Yellow fever - Africa (30): Mauritania ex Angola 20160326.4119691: the fatal case was also imported. Mauritania is a dengue-endemic country and therefore at high risk of ongoing transmission. - Mod.JW]
