Brainerd (MN) Dispatch [edited]<http://www.brainerddispatch.com/news/3995368-dellas-deliverance-brainerd-infant-survives-brush-botulism>A couple, both mental health professionals and deeply religious, found it to difficult to reconcile a key part of their identity -- their faith -- with tragedy. Their 3-month-old daughter was diagnosed earlier in March 2016 with infant botulism. It's an extremely rare disease caused by nerve toxins that gradually cause paralysis and can sometimes lead to death by respiratory failure. Of the roughly 319 million people living in America, on average about 145 people nationwide are diagnosed with various forms of botulism per year, and in 2016, their infant was one of them.""We have struggled quite a bit to understand why bad things like this happen,"" the father said. The parents 1st knew something was wrong when the infant didn't eat or pass anything for 24 hours straight. She was ""fussy and inconsolable,"" the father recalled. The mother called the family's team of pediatric nurses, and the recommendation was to take her into the emergency room. The ER visit lasted 5 hours, but the tests didn't reveal a problem, and she was discharged after being able to take down some fluid, and they planned a follow up the next morning.But that night was the same as the night before, with not eating and no defecation. The infant grew weaker and weaker, and the parents went to their pediatrician. After another hospital stay at Essentia Health-St. Joseph's Medical Center in Brainerd the next day, the family was airlifted to the St. Paul campus of Children's Hospitals and Clinics later that evening. One of the doctors there had coincidentally treated 2 cases of infant botulism in his career beforehand and recognized the symptoms.The doctors called a facility in California and requested them to ship a single antitoxin dose to Minnesota. That dose alone cost more than USD 45 000. After the dose was administered early on 13 Mar 2016, the parents began to see a gradual improvement in their infant's condition: a breathing tube taken out one day, her ability to smile coming back another. Eventually, they moved out of the intensive care unit to a regular hospital wing, and since then, they've been working with rehabilitative therapists to improve the infant's functions. Doctors project that the child will make a full recovery with no limitations, the father said.Botulism in Minnesota is extremely rare, according to the state Department of Health. Tory Whitten, an MDH epidemiologist (disease expert), said there's about one case of infant botulism per year in the state, with some years seeing no cases at all.Adults almost only get botulism either from contaminated food or through ""wound botulism"" from sources like dirty needles. Infants can contract botulism through spores, because their digestive systems produce less acid than adults, acid which would otherwise kill the toxin-producing botulism bacteria.So far in 2016, the infant has been one of 2 total cases of infant botulism. The other case was an infant in the metro area, Whitten said.Botulism can sometimes be contracted when infants eat contaminated honey, Whitten said, but other than avoiding honey, there's really no way to prevent babies from ingesting botulism. The vast array of possible spore sources makes it frustrating when talking to parents who want to know how their baby got the disease, she said, because it's impossible to give them a specific source.Symptoms of botulism can be difficult to spot in the early stages; the baby might simply be more fussy, Whitten said, and they may not be able to suck as well. However, as the disease progresses, the infant will become constipated. Then, a weakness or paralysis will take hold, from the head, progressing downwards. The baby's eyelids may droop, and its cry will become weaker, she said. Facial muscles won't work as well. Anyone who suspects their infant may have botulism should contact their healthcare provider.[Byline: Zach Kayser]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The following is extracted from the CDC report on infant botulism in New York City (ProMED-mail post Infant botulism - USA (New York City) 20030117.0144):""Intestinal botulism is the commonest form of human botulism in the USA; about 100 cases are reported among infants in the USA annually. Intestinal botulism occurs rarely in older children and adults [this form has been also referred to as adult colonization botulism. - Mod.LL] Intestinal botulism results from colonization and bacterial production of botulinum toxin in the colon. Swallowing ambient _Clostridium botulinum_ spores, which exist worldwide in soil and dust, has been proposed as the principal route of exposure; honey is an avoidable source of some causative spores. A common source of exposure is not usually identified; apparent clusters are rare and often remain unexplained after investigations are complete. In a cluster of infant botulism cases identified previously in the mid-Atlantic region of the USA, no common source of exposure was identified.""Botulism should be suspected in previously healthy infants aged less than 12 months old who are constipated and who exhibit weakness in sucking, swallowing, or crying; hypotonia [decreased muscle tone]; and progressive bulbar and extremity muscle weakness. About half of patients require mechanical ventilation during hospitalization. Lumbar puncture and brain imaging generally yield normal results but can help differentiate among other causes of flaccid weakness. When infant botulism is suspected, local and state health departments should be notified promptly to arrange diagnostic stool testing.""Although not specifically stated in this post, botulism immune globulin (BIG) is indicated in infants with clinically diagnosed infant botulism, before diagnostic confirmation. The prompt use of this specific immunoglobulin leads to a significant decrease in both ICU and total hospital stay. Reviews regarding BIG use and infant botulism can be found in the references below.References----------1. Underwood K, Rubin S, Deaker T, Newth C: Infant botulism: A 30-year experience spanning the introduction of botulism immune globulin intravenous in the intensive care Unit at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles. Pediatrics 2007; 120(6): e1380-5; available at <http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/120/6/e1380.long>.2. Pifko E, Price A, Sterner S: Infant botulism and indications for administration of botulism immune globulin. Pediatric Emerg Care 2014; 30(2): 120-4; quiz 125-7. doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000000079; abstract available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24488164>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/354>.]
