The Citizen [edited]<http://www.thecitizen.co.tz/News/Health-authorities-bury-two-killed-by-Ebola-like-illness/-/1840340/3131696/-/1264vhbz/-/index.html>Bodies of 2 people who died recently in the city (Dar es Salaam) after suffering an illness likened to Ebola and dengue were yesterday [23 Mar 2016] interred by health officials under heightened precautions.The Citizen saw health workers wearing personal protective gear aboard a special vehicle carrying 2 caskets bearing the bodies of the deceased, headed for burial in the city. The bodies were being transported from the Muhimbili National Hospital (MNH) to Mwananyamala burial grounds in Konondoni District.This week, health authorities warned the public of diseases prevalent in Tanzania which resemble Ebola. The permanent secretary in the ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Children and the Elderly, Dr Mpoki Ulisubisya, mentioned the diseases to be dengue, yellow fever [or] Rift Valley fever (RVF). However, he stressed that other viral infections such as Ebola, Marburg and Zika fever have not been diagnosed in the country.The warning came after 2 people -- one from Iringa and another from Old Moshi -- fell ill and were rushed to MNH with symptoms of high fever and bleeding from body orifices.The reports come at a time when there is an outbreak of yellow fever in neighbouring Kenya. Two people died in Nairobi recently, and the Kenyan Ministry of Health issued an alert over the outbreak of the disease that has recently killed over 60 people in Angola, according to international media reports. The case of a person who died in Kenya was reported to have entered the country from Angola.Patients suspected with yellow fever usually have symptoms such as chills, nausea, joint pains and sometimes can bleed from the nose or mouth.Early this week, Health Minister Ummy Mwalimu said blood samples of those who died in Dar es Salaam recently had proved negative for Ebola when tests were conducted locally, but there were further efforts to confirm this with the Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI) in Nairobi.Until yesterday [23 Mar 2016], the results from Kenya hadn't been received, according to the head of the pathology unit at Muhimbili National Hospital (MNH), Dr Praxeda Ogweyo. She noted that there was no other report of a patient who had suffered a similar illness.The bereaved family members were only given a chance to witness the burial, but some of them expressed anger towards the authorities' order even as the procedure was meant for their own safety. Relatives of the dead, who had hired a van to go to the burial grounds, expressed mixed feelings when interviewed at the MNH. ""We were only told at the last minute that we can't bury our sister because she had Ebola-like symptoms. We had insisted that we want to take the body back home, but the doctors said 'No'. There is absolutely nothing we can do now,"" one of the relatives coming from Kilimanjaro, who asked not to be named, told The Citizen.Aboard the hired bus was a man who hails from Iringa who said loudly that it was okay to listen to the medical authorities because their decisions were geared at their own safety.[Byline: Syriacus Buguz]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The description of the clinical findings is not sufficient to speculate about the etiology of the diseases of these 2 individuals. If an autopsy was done, there is no mention of its findings either. Ebola virus infection was tentatively ruled out by a local test, but confirmation or elimination awaits tests at KEMRI.If these are deaths from dengue hemorrhagic fever, it is odd that no cases or an outbreak of dengue fever are mentioned. The Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Children and the Elderly, Dr Mpoki Ulisubisya, mentioned Rift Valley fever (RVF), which is certainly a possibility. RVF fever occurs throughout East Africa, including Tanzania. Presumably, RVF will be tested for at KEMRI.In 2013, there were 794 cases of a non-fatal undiagnosed febrile disease in the Kasulu district [Kigoma region], located in the northwestern part of the country not far from the Burundi border, but far distant from Dar es Salaam (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20131123.2069748). There were no subsequent reports providing a diagnosis of these cases. In 2012, 2 patients were admitted to Nyakahanga Hospital in Karagwe District, Kagera Region in the northwest of the country after they exhibited symptoms of the haemorrhagic fever. Blood samples of one of the patients, a 6-year-old boy, had been sent to Dar es Salaam for tests. There were no subsequent reports concerning these cases either. However, this locality is far distant from Dar es Salaam.ProMED will be interested to learn what the results of the KEMRI tests indicate and whether any further similar cases occur in the Dar es Salaam region or elsewhere in Tanzania. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/200>.]
