Science, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) [edited]<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2016/03/23/science.aaf5036>[Ref: Faria NR, Azevedo RD, Kraemer MU, et al: Zika virus in the Americas: Early epidemiological and genetic findings. Science. 2016. pii: aaf5036. [Epub ahead of print]----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------Brazil has experienced an unprecedented epidemic of Zika virus (ZIKV), with approximately 30 000 cases reported to date. ZIKV was first detected in Brazil in May 2015 and cases of microcephaly potentially associated with ZIKV infection were identified in November 2015. Using next generation sequencing we generated 7 Brazilian ZIKV genomes, sampled from 4 self-limited cases, one blood donor, one fatal adult case, and one newborn with microcephaly and congenital malformations. Phylogenetic and molecular clock analyses show a single introduction of ZIKV into the Americas, estimated to have occurred between May-December 2013, more than 12 months prior to the detection of ZIKV in Brazil. The estimated date of origin coincides with an increase in air passengers to Brazil from ZIKV endemic areas, and with reported outbreaks in Pacific Islands. ZIKV genomes from Brazil are phylogenetically interspersed with those from other South American and Caribbean countries. Mapping mutations onto existing structural models revealed the context of viral amino acid changes present in the outbreak lineage; however no shared amino acid changes were found among the 3 currently available virus genomes from microcephaly cases. Municipality-level incidence data indicate that reports of suspected microcephaly in Brazil best correlate with ZIKV incidence around week 17 of pregnancy, although this does not demonstrate causation. Our genetic description and analysis of ZIKV isolates in Brazil provide a baseline for future studies of the evolution and molecular epidemiology in the Americas of this emerging virus.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides additional details that were not included in the previous Zika virus update (archive no. 20160325.4118019; under Brazil, Virus arrival). - Mod.TY]******[3] USA: CDC recommendations for pregnancy and sexual transmissionDate: Fri 25 Mar 2016Source: CDC Media Statement [summ., edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2016/s0325-zika-virus-recommendations.html>CDC issues updated Zika recommendations: timing of pregnancy after Zika exposure, prevention of sexual transmission, considerations for reducing unintended pregnancy in areas with Zika transmission----------------------------------------------------------------------CDC today [25 Mar 2016] issued new guidance and information to prevent Zika virus transmission and health effects:- updated interim guidance for healthcare professionals for counseling patients about pregnancy planning and the timing of pregnancy after possible exposure to Zika virus;- updated interim guidance for preventing sexual transmission with information about how long men and women should consider using condoms or not having sex; and- considerations and challenges, based on Puerto Rico's experience, for reducing unintended pregnancy in areas with active Zika transmission.Article 1: updated interim guidance for pregnant and reproductive age women:* For women and men who have been diagnosed with Zika virus or who have symptoms of Zika including fever, rash, joint pain, or red eyes after possible exposure to Zika virus, CDC recommends healthcare providers advise:- women wait at least 8 weeks after their symptoms first appeared before trying to get pregnant;- men wait at least 6 months after their symptoms first appeared to have unprotected sex;- In making these recommendations, we considered the longest known risk period for these categories. We then allowed for 3 times the known period of time.* For men and women without symptoms of Zika virus but who had possible exposure to Zika from recent travel or sexual contact, CDC recommends healthcare providers advise their patients wait at least 8 weeks after their possible exposure before trying to get pregnant in order to minimize risk.* For men and women without symptoms of Zika virus who live in an area with active Zika transmission, CDC recommends healthcare providers talk with their patients about their pregnancy plans during a Zika virus outbreak, the potential risks of Zika, and how they can prevent Zika virus infection. These are very complex, deeply personal decisions, and we are communicating the potential risks of Zika virus infection during pregnancy for people who live in areas with active transmission. We are encouraging health care providers to have conversations with women and their partners about pregnancy planning, their individual circumstances, and strategies to prevent unintended pregnancies.Article 2: Updated interim guidance for preventing sexual transmission of Zika:* Couples with men who have confirmed Zika or symptoms of Zika should consider using condoms or not having sex for at least 6 months after symptoms begin. This includes men who live in and men who traveled to areas with Zika.* Couples with men who traveled to an area with Zika but did not develop symptoms of Zika should consider using condoms or not having sex for at least 8 weeks after their return in order to minimize risk.* Couples with men who live in an area with Zika but have not developed symptoms might consider using condoms or not having sex while there is active Zika transmission in the area.Article 3: Increasing access to contraception in areas with active Zika transmission--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Individuals interested in the topics above are urged to read the entire CDC notice available at the source URL above. - Mod.TY]******[4] French Polynesia: microcephalyDate: Mon 28 Mar 2016Source: New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM) Journal Watch [edited]<http://www.jwatch.org/na40900/2016/03/28/zika-virus-and-microcephaly-french-polynesia>Ref: Mary E Wilson, MD reviewing Cauchemez S et al. Lancet 2016. Rodrigues LC. Lancet 2016. Zika Virus and Microcephaly in French Polynesia----------------------------------------------------------------------The estimated risk for microcephaly in the fetus was approximately 1 percent for women infected in the 1st trimester of pregnancy.Zika virus (ZIKV) caused a large outbreak in 2013-14 in French Polynesia, where it was estimated to infect 66 percent of the general population. In a retrospective study, investigators estimated the probability of ZIKV infection during each week of the epidemic and identified all cases of microcephaly from September 2013 to July 2015. They developed a simple model to assess periods for risk during pregnancy and to estimate the associated risk for microcephaly.Using a strict and standardized definition, the researchers identified 8 cases of microcephaly during the study period, 7 of which occurred during a 4-month period in 2014. Other data sets used in the analysis were the number of weekly consultations for suspected ZIKV infections, ZIKV seroprevalence at the start and end of the epidemic, and the number of births.The mathematical models with satisfactory fit all included ZIKV infection in the 1st trimester of pregnancy as a period of risk for microcephaly. The model with the best fit overall included only the 1st trimester. Among women infected during the 1st trimester, an estimated 1 percent had infants with microcephaly.Comment-------The estimated rate of microcephaly in this population is substantially above the historical baseline of about 2 per 10 000 neonates (0.02 percent). The authors note that the 1 percent risk for microcephaly post-Zika infection is low compared with other viruses, such as rubella, that cause congenital abnormalities after 1st-trimester infections. Despite the low risk for microcephaly per pregnancy, the extremely high attack rate of Zika infection in a susceptible population can produce a high burden. The editorialist comments that other studies have suggested higher rates of post-Zika infection microcephaly. As yet unknown is whether risk is influenced by other factors, such as genetics, symptomatic (vs asymptomatic) infection with Zika, and infection with dengue virus.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[As the Zika virus outbreak continues in the Americas, additional data on post-Zika virus infection microencephaly will be accrued. Confounding factors such as those mentioned in the comment above will continue to make it more difficult to draw conclusions about the causes contributing to incidence of microcephaly. - Mod.TY]
