kp.ua [in Russian, trans. Mod.NR, edited]<http://kp.ua/life/534015-sybyrskaia-yazva-v-chuhueve-17-chelovek-pod-nabluidenyem-vrachei>Anthrax in Chuguev: 17 people under medical supervision-------------------------------------------------------A 2-week quarantine is announced in the Chuguev district of Kharkiv oblast [region]. The reason for the quarantine is the discovery of anthrax in the pig meat, which was raised by a local farmer. The farmer had no idea that the pig was infected with anthrax. When the farmer was butchering the meat, he noticed that the spleen was abnormally enlarged; so he sent the spleen for lab test, which revealed that the pig was infected with anthrax.According to sanitary epidemiological surveillance officials, animals infected with anthrax are [infectious] and can spread the spores with urine, feces, milk, spotting. Humans can be infected while caring for a sick animal or through cuts or slaughtering. Additionally, people can catch the disease through consuming the infected meat, as well as through contact with wool, hides, bristles, and soil containing anthrax. [Actually, soil source cases in humans are very rare. - Mod.MHJ] The disease can be fatal for humans, particularly if it is a visceral form of the disease; with the skin form, it can be fatal for every 5th case.""I have personally eaten the meat and it tasted as good as always,"" said the owner of the pig.Currently 17 people who had contact with the infected animal or its meat, including relatives and neighbors of the farmer, as well as laboratory staff who conducted the test, are under observation. They are being tested and prescribed prophylactic treatment. Remains of the meat have been burned, and the house and barn, where the pig was contained, have been disinfected.More samples were collected from the refrigerator, tools, and equipment that were used to care for the animals, including soil samples, and were sent to a lab for further testing. [Presumably bloody soil samples. - Mod.MHJ]It is still unclear how the animal could get anthrax. It is presumed that the source of infection could be the water, food or soil: in earlier days, anthrax-infected animals were buried in the ground instead of being burned, and in the soil, bacteria can survive for many years. While the source of the infection is still being established, veterinarians are vaccinating animals on neighboring farms, and public health officials are warning all not to buy meat from the suspicious (unregulated) markets. By the way: The last time a human case of anthrax was registered in Ukraine was 2012 in the Kharkiv oblast, and before that in 2003 (Sakhnovshchyns'kyi district [Kharkiv oblast]). An animal case of anthrax was registered in 2007 (in Balakleyskiy district). Epidemiologists think that Ukraine does not have the most favorable situation in regards to anthrax, since it has 13 500 areas including villages or farms that are potentially under risk for anthrax and 12 of them are in Chuguev district.[Byline: Maria Solodovnikov]--Communicated by:Sabine ZentisCastleview English LonghornsGut Laach, D-52385 NideggenGermany<sabinezentis@gmail.com>[In general, the incidence of anthrax among humans and farm animals in the Ukraine can be characterized as sporadic. The last time a human case of the disease was registered was in 2012 in Cherkasy region and in the same year in animals (cattle) in the Zaporozhye region. - Mod.NP][In fact, 5 outbreaks were noted in 2007, in Ivano-Frankovsk, Kharkiv, Ivano-Frankovsk, Odessa and Zakarpats'ka; a farm was affected in 2010 in Khotyn district, Chernivtsi oblast; and (as mentioned above) there were 2 outbreaks in 2012 in Cherkasy and Zaporozhye, one of which resulted in a human case. The last human case in the Ukraine was in 2008, interestingly in a year with no officially reported livestock outbreaks. The last porcine outbreak was in 2006 and involved 10 pigs.Kharkiv oblast is in eastern Ukraine on the border with Russia: see <http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/europe/ukraine_adm93.jpg>. A porcine outbreak in late winter/early spring would be indicative of an outbreak following contaminated pig feed in housed pigs, a situation not uncommon in Russia. So I suspect that this outbreak followed upon the recent border redrawing by the Russians. And when there is a batch of contaminated feed, outbreaks can involve a number of farms. Otherwise, anthrax is truly sporadic in the Ukraine, thanks to their aggressive annual vaccination programme.Our thanks to Sabine, and to Nilufar for the translation. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3801>.]
