USA Today [edited]<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2016/03/31/cdc-lab-worker-infected-salmonella/82481274/>Latest CDC lab incident involves worker infected with salmonella----------------------------------------------------------------The CDC is investigating how one of its own lab workers became infected with a strain of salmonella that was being used as part of their job, the agency announced Thursday, 31 Mar 2016. The possible lab-acquired infection is the latest in a series of incidents at the Atlanta [Georgia]-based agency, including previous mishandling of specimens of anthrax, Ebola and a deadly strain of avian influenza.The CDC said the lab worker who was sickened with salmonellosis had been infected with a strain that has a relatively rare DNA fingerprint. Salmonellosis, which is usually spread through contaminated food, typically manifests as diarrhea, fever and abdominal cramps that can last from 4 to 7 days.""The worker is well and back at CDC and, based on what we know now, no other staff were exposed or sick, and there was no release outside the laboratory,"" the agency said in a press release.The worker had completed all required safety training and was following standard protocols while performing a procedure on a frozen sample of _Salmonella_ in an effort to grow the bacterium, the CDC said. In the days following the procedure, the worker became ill and on 18 Mar 2016 informed the agency they had been diagnosed with salmonellosis. The agency said it is investigating to see if additional laboratory safeguards are needed to prevent exposures in the future.Biosafety experts expressed concern about the infection, but praised the CDC for identifying it and notifying the public.""I think the important thing here is that the CDC learned from its past mistakes and is now practicing transparency,"" said Scott Becker, executive director of the Association of Public Health Laboratories. Becker, who noted that lab work carries risks, said the CDC's new lab safety office will play an important role in reviewing the policies and procedures to determine what happened in the incident.Sean Kaufman, a biosafety consultant who has testified before Congress, said it's good news that mechanisms were in place to identify when a lab worker got sick. But Kaufman said he remains concerned that CDC has not addressed systemic issues with lab safety. ""Even though CDC has taken steps in the right direction, there continues to be a stream of incidents and accidents,"" Kaufman said.Exactly how many lab incidents have occurred at CDC in recent years is unclear because the agency has been slow to release records under the federal Freedom of Information Act. Last year [2015], the CDC told the USA Today it will take until sometime in 2018 before it will release reports of all incidents that occurred at the agency's labs in Atlanta and Fort Collins, Colorado, during 2013 and 2014.A summary of lab incidents the agency provided to the news organization was incomplete and revealed the CDC lacked a key policy to ensure top agency safety officials received reports of mishaps, despite promises to Congress of reforms.The USA Today Network's ""Biolabs in Your Backyard"" investigation, published throughout 2015, revealed that incidents at the CDC are among hundreds that have occurred at corporate, university, government and military labs nationwide. It also exposed a system of fragmented federal oversight and pervasive secrecy that obscures failings by facilities and regulators. The series has been cited in ongoing congressional investigations and in new transparency reforms called for by White House science and homeland security advisers. In November [2015], the CDC replaced the head of its laboratory regulation program, which inspects biodefense labs nationwide that work with potential bioterror pathogens.The CDC's high-profile 2014 incidents that involved potential bioterror pathogens like anthrax and Ebola occurred in biosafety level 3 and 4 labs -- the 2 highest safety levels -- where scientists wear specialized gear ranging from respirators to full-body, spacesuit-like protection. The new salmonellosis incident involved a common strain of the bacterium that causes food-borne illnesses and it occurred at a biosafety level 2 lab where workers may only wear gloves, gowns and face masks.Kaufman said it's important to have a strong culture of safety and attention to detail in all levels of labs to ensure workers don't get sick and potentially spread illness to their families. ""There was some sort of breakdown in those procedures and someone got sick,"" he said of the latest incident.[Byline: Alison Young]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Thu 31 Mar 2016Source: CDC [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2016/s0331-potential-laboratory-infection.html>CDC is investigating how one of its laboratory workers who was recently diagnosed with salmonellosis may have acquired their infection due to work they performed in a BSL-2 laboratory (a level of lab work involving pathogens that are common and treatable causes of illness). _Salmonella_ is not a select agent. Preliminary laboratory tests indicate that the worker was infected with a strain of _Salmonella_ which matched the strain being worked on in the lab. The worker is well and back at CDC and, based on what we know now, no other staff were exposed. The worker had hands-on training by experienced microbiologists and completed all required safety training. The worker was following standard protocols to perform a basic procedure on a frozen sample in an effort to culture or grow the bacteria. The agency is investigating to see if additional safeguards are needed to prevent exposures when performing this procedure in the future.CDC estimates there are 1.2 million cases of salmonellosis infection each year in the USA. Salmonellosis is usually acquired by eating contaminated food. People with this kind of infection typically have diarrhea, fever and abdominal cramps that go away without specific treatment within 4-7 days.Laboratory science is critical to protect America's health. However this work carries risks. CDC has implemented numerous steps over the past few years to enhance its laboratory safety program, including standing up the Office of the Associate Director for Laboratory Science and Safety, reviewing laboratory safety protocols, and establishing the Laboratory Leadership Service fellowship program. The agency has implemented rigorous steps to minimize these risks and to quickly investigate these incidents when they do occur including this recent incident.For the latest reports and updates on laboratory safety at CDC go to: <http://www.cdc.gov/about/lab-safety/index.html>.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The exact mechanism of acquisition of the enteric pathogen in this case is not known or at least not reported here, nor is the specific serotype of _Salmonella enterica_ elucidated. - Mod.LLSalmonellae are diagnosed in clinical and research labs all over the world, but ProMED has posted only 3 previous reports of lab infection -- see ProMED archives for 2012 & 2014 below.  Human error can never be completely excluded. - Mod.JWA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/213>.]
