WHO Emergencies - Zika Situation Report [edited]<http://www.who.int/emergencies/zika-virus/situation-report/31-march-2016/en/>Zika virus, Microcephaly and Guillain-Barre syndromeSummary- From 1 Jan 2007 - 30 Mar 2016, Zika virus transmission was documented in a total of 61 countries and territories; 4 of these (Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Isla de Pascua [Easter Island] - Chile, and New Caledonia) reported a Zika virus outbreak that is now over. Six countries have now reported locally acquired infection in the absence of any known mosquito vectors, probably through sexual transmission (Argentina, Chile, France, Italy, New Zealand and the United States of America).- In the Region of the Americas, the geographical distribution of Zika virus has steadily widened since the presence of the virus was confirmed in 2015. Mosquito-borne Zika virus transmission has been reported in 33 countries and territories of this region.- In the Western Pacific Region, mosquito-borne Zika virus cases have been reported in 16 countries and areas.- Microcephaly and other fetal malformations have been reported in Brazil (944 cases), Cabo Verde (2 cases), Colombia (32 cases), French Polynesia (8 cases), Martinique (1 case) and Panama (1 case). Two additional cases, linked to a stay in Brazil, were detected in the United States of America and Slovenia.- In the context of Zika virus circulation, 13 countries or territories have reported an increased incidence of Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) and/or laboratory confirmation of a Zika virus infection among GBS cases.- Based on observational, cohort and case-control studies, there is strong scientific consensus that Zika virus is a cause of GBS, microcephaly and other neurological disorders.- The global prevention and control strategy launched by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a Strategic Response Framework encompasses surveillance, response activities and research. This situation report is organized under those headings.--Communicated by:Z. B. Seyed<z.baradaran@gmail.com>[This report provides a good overview of the status of Zika virus infections around the world. It also makes the strongest statement yet -- scientific consensus -- about Zika virus infection being the cause of some cases of fetal infection and microcephaly as well as GBS. The above URL provides a map showing the geographic distribution of Zika virus infections. A link to the full report is available at the above URL. - Mod.TY] ******[3] Fetal and maternal infectionDate: Wed 30 Mar 2016Source: The New England Journal of Medicine DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1601824 [summ., edited]<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1601824?query=featured_infectious-disease#t=article>Rita W. Driggers, M.D., Cheng-Ying Ho, M.D., Ph.D., Essi M. Korhonen, M.Sc., Suvi Kuivanen, M.Sc., Anne J. Jaskelainen, Ph.D., Teemu Smura, Ph.D., Avi Rosenberg, M.D., Ph.D., D. Ashley Hill, M.D., Roberta L. DeBiasi, M.D., Gilbert Vezina, M.D., Julia Timofeev, M.D., Fausto J. Rodriguez, M.D., Lev Levanov, Ph.D., Jennifer Razak, M.G.C., C.G.C, Preetha Iyengar, M.D., Andrew Hennenfent, D.V.M., M.P.H., Richard Kennedy, M.D., Robert Lanciotti, Ph.D., Adre du Plessis, M.B., Ch.B., M.P.H., and Olli Vapalahti, M.D., Ph.D. Zika virus infection with prolonged maternal viremia and fetal brain abnormalities.Case reportA 33-year-old Finnish woman who was in the 11th week of gestation was on holiday in Mexico, Guatemala, and Belize with her husband in late November 2015. One day after her arrival at her current residence in Washington, D.C., she became ill with ocular pain, myalgia, and mild fever, which lasted for 5 days. On the 2nd day of fever, a rash developed. Serologic analysis was positive for both IgG and IgM antibodies against ZIKV, findings that were compatible with acute or recent ZIKV infection.Fetal ultrasonography that was performed at 13, 16, and 17 weeks of gestation (1, 4, and 5 weeks after the resolution of symptoms) showed no evidence of microcephaly or intracranial calcifications. However, there was a decrease in the fetal head circumference from the 47th percentile at 16 weeks to the 24th percentile at 20 weeks. [The pregnancy was terminated on the 21st week due to extensive fetal damage.]At 16 weeks of gestation, the presence of flavivirus in serum was detected on nested reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) assay, and sequencing showed identity to Central American epidemic strains of ZIKV. The finding was confirmed with a specific ZIKV quantitative RT-PCR assay.Fetal ultrasonography at 19 weeks of gestation showed abnormal intracranial anatomy. Fetal MRI at 20 weeks of gestation showed diffuse atrophy of the cerebral mantle, which was most severe in the frontal and parietal lobes, with the anterior temporal lobes least affected. [Details for weeks 19 and 20 are available in the full report].ResultsFetal Neurologic AbnormalitiesA postmortem examination was performed with materials collected for additional study. Gross examination showed normal fetal anatomy and severe autolysis. Microscopically, early mineralization was seen in association with apoptotic neurons focally. In addition to the cortical neuronal abnormalities, the subventricular zone and white matter showed severe volume loss with extensive axonal rarefaction and macrophage infiltrates.Fetal and Maternal ZIKV Viral LoadsThe highest ZIKV viral loads were found in fetal brain, with substantial viral loads in the placenta, fetal membranes, and umbilical cord, as studied on quantitative RT-PCR. Lower amounts of ZIKV RNA were found in fetal muscle, liver, lung, and spleen.Virus isolationPhylogenetic analysis indicated that the viral strain (designated ZIKV_FB-GWUH-2016; GenBank number, KU870645) was a member of the Asian genotype and closely related to 2 ZIKV sequences obtained from Guatemalan patients who presented with mild illness.DiscussionWe have detected ZIKV RNA in the serum of a pregnant woman at 4 weeks and 10 weeks after the clinical onset of ZIKV infection but not after delivery. We suspect that the persistent ZIKV viremia in the patient described here was a consequence of viral replication in the fetus or placenta, which had high viral loads. Therefore, in addition to current ZIKV diagnostics, the use of quantitative RT-PCR methods may be a potential diagnostic approach for ongoing placental or fetal infections in pregnant women. Notably, in this patient, the ZIKV RNA levels were slightly higher in the maternal serum than in the amniotic fluid.In our study, a review of 3 sequential ultrasonographic images between 16 and 20 weeks showed a decrease in the fetal head circumferences from the 47th percentile to the 24th percentile, which suggests a reduction in the rate of brain growth during that. We suspect these reductions in brain growth would have eventually met the criteria for microcephaly. As this case shows, the latency period between ZIKV infection of the fetal brain and the detection of microcephaly and intracranial calcifications on ultrasonography is likely to be prolonged. Negative ultrasonographic studies during this period would be falsely reassuring and might delay critical time-sensitive decision making [about terminating the pregnancy]. Serial ultrasonographic measurements of head circumference may provide useful predictive information. The superior soft-tissue resolution of fetal brain MRI might be more sensitive to developmental and encephaloclastic changes, thereby expediting the detection of evolving fetal brain anomalies.In conclusion, our study highlights the possible importance of ZIKV RNA testing of serum obtained from pregnant women beyond the 1st week after symptom onset, as well as a more detailed evaluation of the fetal intracranial anatomy by means of serial fetal ultrasonography or fetal brain MRI. The isolation of ZIKV from fetal brain provides additional evidence for the association between congenital ZIKV infection and fetal brain damage and provides tools for further studies of the pathogenesis of ZIKV-induced microcephaly. Future studies at various gestational ages will offer better insight into the role of ZIKV infection in abnormal brain development and provide markers for its detection.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Although this study involves just one case, their findings suggest that serial ultrasonography and testing of serum of pregnant women provide useful tools in establishing the state of fetal development and the status of Zika virus infection of the mother. ProMED-mail subscribers interested in the details of this case and the related discussion are encouraged to read the entire article. - Mod.TY]******[4] Viral entry receptorDate: Wed 30 Mar 2016Source: Cell stem Cell doi:10.1016/j.stem.2016.03.012 [edited]<http://www.cell.com/cell-stem-cell/fulltext/S1934-5909(16)00118-1>Tomasz J. Nowakowski, Alex A. Pollen, Elizabeth Di Lullo, Carmen Sandoval-Espinosa, Marina Bershteyn, Arnold R. Kriegstein. Expression analysis highlights AXL as a candidate Zika virus entry receptor in neural stem cells.SummaryThe recent outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) in Brazil has been linked to substantial increases in fetal abnormalities and microcephaly. However, information about the underlying molecular and cellular mechanisms connecting viral infection to these defects remains limited. In this study we have examined the expression of receptors implicated in cell entry of several enveloped viruses including ZIKV across diverse cell types in the developing brain. Using single-cell RNA-seq and immunohistochemistry, we found that the candidate viral entry receptor AXL is highly expressed by human radial glial cells, astrocytes, endothelial cells, and microglia in developing human cortex and by progenitor cells in developing retina. We also show that AXL expression in radial glia is conserved in developing mouse and ferret cortex and in human stem cell-derived cerebral organoids, highlighting multiple experimental systems that could be applied to study mechanisms of ZIKV infectivity and effects on brain development.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The AXL receptor may prove to be a key factor in initiating Zika virus infection of the developing fetal brain. Results of further investigation in this area are awaited with interest. - Mod.TY]******[5] Virus structureDate: Thu 31 Mar 2016Source: Science DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf5316 [edited]<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2016/03/30/science.aaf5316>Devika Sirohi, Zhenguo Chen, Lei Sun, Thomas Klose, Theodore C. Pierson, Michael G. Rossmann, Richard J. Kuhn. The 3.8 ÌÄ... resolution cryo-EM structure of Zika virusAbstractThe recent rapid spread of Zika virus and its unexpected linkage to birth defects and an autoimmune-neurological syndrome has generated worldwide concern. Zika virus is a flavivirus like dengue, yellow fever and West Nile viruses. We present the 3.8ÌÄ... resolution structure of mature Zika virus determined by cryo-electron microscopy. The structure of Zika virus is similar to other known flavivirus structures except for the around 10 amino acids that surround the Asn154 glycosylation site found in each of the 180 envelope glycoproteins that make up the icosahedral shell. The carbohydrate moiety associated with this residue, recognizable in the cryo-EM electron density, may function as an attachment site of the virus to host cells. This region varies not only among Zika virus strains but also in other flaviviruses and suggests that changes in this region influence virus transmission and disease.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The identification of the possible attachment site to host cells may provide a link to mosquito susceptibility to Zika virus and to one of the underlying mechanisms leading to disease in human hosts. Future advances into Zika virus structure will be of considerable interest. - Mod.TY]******[6] Blood screeningDate: Thu 31 Mar 2016Source: Genome Web [subscription required, edited]<https://goo.gl/7mJbrr>The US Food and Drug Administration has paved the way for Roche's Cobas Zika assay to be used to screen blood donations in Puerto Rico for the virus, as GenomeWeb has reported.Due to concerns about the virus, blood donations in Puerto Rico had been stopped, meaning that the US territory has had to import some 6000 units of red blood from the continental US, the New York Times adds. The virus is also expected to make its way to the US Gulf Coast this summer [2016], it notes.The agency approved the use of the test under its Investigational New Drug application protocol, according to GenomeWeb.The Zika virus is a concern for blood banks as about 80 percent of infected people aren't aware that they've caught the virus. The Times notes that it's unclear how people who receive infected blood fare, as the infection is usually mild, though underlying conditions can transform it into a life-threatening one.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is going to be interesting to see how well this screening test works in the field. If sensitivity and specificity are adequate and the cost not too great, surely other countries having Zika virus outbreaks will want to use it for the safety of their blood supply. - Mod.TY]
