Los Angeles Times [edited]<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-death-toll-fentanyl-climbs-to-9-20160401-story.html>The death toll from suspected overdoses of a powerful painkiller on the streets of the Sacramento [California] region rose to 9 Friday (1 Apr 2016) as officials raced to find the source of illicit drugs.Authorities said that a total of 36 people have overdosed from what authorities believe is the powerful opiate fentanyl. Just one of those deaths was outside of the county, in adjacent Yolo County, said Laura McCasland of the Sacramento County Department of Health and Human Services. All those deaths have been in the last 2 weeks.Experts say the rise of fentanyl is fueled by widespread prescription drug abuse that claims thousands of lives each year. Since 1999, more than 165 000 people in the U.S. have died of causes related to painkiller use.Once centered on the East Coast, use of the drug now seems to be spreading west, probably through Mexican drug cartels, medical and law enforcement officials said.  ""This is just another face of the opioid epidemic,"" said Dr. Caleb Alexander, co-director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Drug Safety and Effectiveness.Over the last week and a half, health workers in Sacramento reported dozens of overdoses and several deaths from fentanyl. The painkiller offers an intense, euphoric high and is sometimes used to cut heroin and cocaine or passed off as another drug.  The pills resembled Norco, a prescription painkiller similar to Vicodin and Percocet. But lab tests didn't find Norco's active ingredients and the tablets were likely fentanyl pills manufactured to resemble Norco, McCasland said.  One official said the street price of the pills was no more than USD 5.  A few grains of the odorless, white powder, often called China White or Apache, can be enough to kill.Prescribed to cancer patients for decades, fentanyl is the most powerful painkiller available for medical treatment, up to 100 times stronger than morphine. It's typically administered as a lozenge, patch or injection to patients with severe pain.In recent years, an illegally manufactured version of the drug has begun spreading, with cases concentrated in the eastern half of the United States.  Between 2012 and 2014, the number of seizures of illegally used fentanyl nationwide increased more than 7-fold to 4585, according to federal officials.Sgt. Salvador Robles of the Sacramento County sheriff's major narcotics impact division said investigators have a ""strong lead"" on a Sacramento County home where 2 of the overdoses occurred and are hoping to trace the cases back to the source of the fentanyl.  Robles said he didn't know whether this was a single bad batch, or a larger problem.  ""My only tip is, if you're addicted to Norco or any pills, do not take them right now,"" he said.An increase in doctor-prescribed painkillers over the last decade has left many patients addicted to opiates, intensifying a heroin epidemic that is ravaging many towns nationwide, experts said.  In 2014, 28 647 people died of overdose deaths from opioids, including heroin, the highest toll ever recorded, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.In Sacramento County, heroin use has increased within the last decade as use of methamphetamines has dropped, Robles said; 15 years ago, seizing a few ounces of heroin in Sacramento County was rare, he said, but ""now we're finding it in [kilos].""Approximately 700 people died from fentanyl and its analogs nationwide between late 2013 and late 2014, according to a recent report from the DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration].  Past investigations have revealed that Mexican cartels are purchasing fentanyl produced in China, then using traditional trafficking routes to bring it into the United States. In 2014, DEA officers seized 26 pounds of fentanyl in a stash house in Los Angeles.Alexander, the Johns Hopkins physician, said that demand will remain strong until the prescription drug epidemic is under control. He said doctors should limit how often they prescribe opiates to patients and expand treatment programs for those who are already addicted.  ""Do we need to be worried about it? Yes,"" Alexander said. ""But I don't think ... these deaths can be separated from the surge in overuse of prescription opioid. It's part and parcel of the same problem.""In remarks Tuesday [29 Mar 2016] at a conference on drug abuse, President Obama said more Americans now die each year from opioid overdose than in traffic accidents. He has asked for more than USD 1 billion in federal funding to help expand access to treatment programs.Earlier this month [March 2016], officials from the CDC released new guidelines strongly discouraging doctors from prescribing opiates, including OxyContin and Vicodin, for patients with chronic conditions such as back problems, migraines and arthritis.  ""We know of no other medication routinely used for a nonfatal condition that kills patients so frequently,"" wrote CDC director Dr. Tom Frieden and a colleague in the New England Journal of Medicine.[Byline: Joseph Serna]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Drug abuse and drug misuse is not an emerging problem and this is posted only as an awareness of legal drugs being diverted for illicit purposes.Fentanyl is one of the strongest opiate drugs on the market. It is not a long-lasting drug so it is often used for surgery recovery and for breakthrough pain -- meaning that when a person is already taking an opiate but has temporary pain that breaks through the opiate barrier, they may be given fentanyl.Fentanyl is a powerful synthetic opiate analgesic similar to but more potent than morphine. It is typically used to treat patients with severe pain, or to manage pain after surgery. It is also sometimes used to treat people with chronic pain who are physically tolerant to opiates. It is a schedule II prescription drug.Time-release formulations for fentanyl provide strong pain relief over time. They come in 2 forms -- a lollipop and a patch. Fentanyl also comes as a small piece of film that can be dissolved under the tongue and a pill meant to be lodged inside the cheek. In hospital settings, fentanyl can be injected. For the individual abusing the drug outside a hospital, this is highly dangerous, as the difference between a therapeutic dose and a deadly dose is very small.As with any opiate, the main symptoms of fentanyl abuse are euphoria, drowsiness, lethargy and mellowness. Fentanyl very quickly creates a tolerance to high doses, so a dose that is adequate for the intended high one week will probably not create that intended high even a few days later.  There are many other signs and symptoms of using fentanyl, either medically or illicitly, that are not desirable.These include:- Dizziness and lightheadedness- Dry mouth- Retention of urine- Suppression of breathing- Severe constipation- Itching or hives- Nausea and vomiting- Loss of appetite- Weight loss- Headache- Difficulty seeing- Depression- Hallucinations- Bad dreams- Difficulty sleeping- Sweating- Shaking- Swollen extremitiesIn its prescription form, fentanyl is known as Actiq, Duragesic, and Sublimaze. Street names for the drug include Apache, China girl, China white, dance fever, friend, goodfella, jackpot, murder 8, TNT, as well as Tango and Cash.Like heroin, morphine, and other opioid drugs, fentanyl works by binding to the body's opiate receptors, highly concentrated in areas of the brain that control pain and emotions. When opiate drugs bind to these receptors, they can drive up dopamine levels in the brain's reward areas, producing a state of euphoria and relaxation. Medications called opiate receptor antagonists act by blocking the effects of opiate drugs. Naloxone is one such antagonist. Overdoses of fentanyl should be treated immediately with an opiate antagonist.When prescribed by a physician, fentanyl is often administered via injection, transdermal patch, or in lozenge form. However, the type of fentanyl associated with recent overdoses was produced in clandestine laboratories and mixed with (or substituted for) heroin in a powder form.Mixing fentanyl with street-sold heroin or cocaine markedly amplifies their potency and potential dangers. Effects include: euphoria, drowsiness/respiratory depression and arrest, nausea, confusion, constipation, sedation, unconsciousness, coma, tolerance, and addiction.While opioid deaths are sad, anyone dabbling in illicit drugs could have opioids, synthetic drugs, or other chemicals in the illicit product. It is a case of buyer beware.However, to prohibit opioid use by those with chronic pain is akin to the old adage of throwing out the baby with the bathwater.Regulations regarding opioids and other controlled substances have been tightened recently but to ban the use for those with chronic pain is to turn a blind eye on pain for some people. That is wrong.Portions of this comment have been extracted from <https://www.drugabuse.gov/drugs-abuse/fentanyl> and from <http://www.narconon.org/drug-abuse/fentanyl-signs-symptoms.html>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
