AllAfrica, The Monitor report [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201604020013.html>At least one person has been confirmed dead and more than 25 others hospitalized following cholera outbreak in Butaleja District. The district health department confirmed the outbreak in the area with the 25 cases at Nabiganda Health Centre IV.The district health officer, Dr John Matovu, told Saturday Monitor in an interview on [Thu 31 Mar 2016], that they have recorded one death related to the disease since the outbreak was reported on Easter [Mon 28 Mar 2016]. He said the 1st suspected case was reported in Nabiganda Trading Centre in Kachonga Sub-county. ""Let me take this opportunity to inform all members of the public that there is a cholera outbreak in our district. So far, about 25 cases have been detected,"" said Dr Matovu. He said they have opened up an isolation centre at Nabiganda Health Centre IV to handle the cases, adding that at the moment, they don't have drugs to contain the spread of the disease.Dr Matovu identified the most affected sub-counties as Kachonga and Mazimasa. The Resident District Commissioner, Mr Richard Gulume, suspects that the epidemic could have spread to Butaleja from the neighboring districts of Busia, Tororo, Mbale, Sironko and Bulambuli where cases of the deadly disease have been confirmed. ""The district security committee has set up a task force to start field operations to sensitize residents on hygiene and sanitation. This is one of the ways of containing the epidemic in the district,"" Mr Gulume said.A lady who operates a restaurant at Nabiganda Trading Centre, blamed the outbreak of the epidemic on lack of public toilets and safe water sources in the trading centres. ""Most people take contaminated water. We don't have any good source of drinking water,"" she said.According to the district health department statistics, pit-latrine coverage stands at 65 percent while water coverage stands at 60 percent.[Byline: Yahudu Kitunzi]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Butaleja District is a district in Eastern Uganda. The districts can be seen on a map at: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Districts_of_Uganda>. - Mod.LL]******[2] Cholera - KenyaDate: Wed 30 Mar 2016Source: AllAfrica, Daily Nation report [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201603310219.html>At least 216 people have died and close to 13 000 others admitted following a cholera outbreak that has affected more than half of the country. The Ministry of Health has mapped out close to 12 counties that are currently reporting cases of cholera outbreak. The ministry also says 16 counties have managed to contain the epidemic.The 2-year outbreak started in 2014 and has been recurring since then. However, the ministry is yet to give the latest statistics of deaths and admissions since January 2016. Just like the number of deaths and admissions, the number of counties that have reported the disease has doubled. In June 2015, 81 deaths were recorded and this has since almost tripled.While urging the public to take extra caution while handling food and to observe high hygienic standards, Health Principal Secretary Nicholas Muraguri said some counties were reporting cases of cholera for the first time when others were dealing with a perennial issue. Dr Muraguri said Wajir, Marsabit, Tharaka Nithi, Tana River, Meru, Busia and Nandi counties are experiencing the first ever wave of the outbreak, meaning these counties have been reporting cases of cholera since the 2014 outbreak. ""Garissa County is reporting the 2nd wave; Nakuru the 3rd wave, Siaya and Migori the 4th while Nairobi is reporting the 5th wave,"" added Dr Muraguri.He also said a cholera surveillance report by the ministry revealed that the highest number of cases are being reported among people above 46 years old, followed by those between 6 and 15. The least number of cases are reported among Kenyans aged 36 to 45.[Byline: Eunice Kilonzo]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Cholera - ZambiaDate: Wed 30 Mar 2016Source: Zambia Reports [edited]<http://zambiareports.com/2016/03/30/cholera-hits-443-cases/>Cholera cases in the country have hit the 443 mark extending to Ndola where one case has been reported. The scourge is largely prevalent in Lusaka, with Bauleni and Kanyama townships hit hardest. Lusaka has recorded 16 new cases while on the Copperbelt only Ndola has recorded one occurrence. Recently Local Government and Housing Minister, Stephen Kampyongo, announced that the sale of foodstuffs by vendors on the streets had been suspended in light of the cholera outbreak. [Byline: Peter Adamu]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The following is taken from a reader comment attached to the article, by Austin Bhebe:""2 ignored factors that emphasize governments' insensitiveness to Zambians - overwhelmingly unacceptable poor sanitary conditions of the nation and the abysmally low levels of access to medical services - have helped in the ricocheting cholera outbreaks now being reported in Lusaka and Ndola.It is a shame in today's world to read that cholera cases in Zambia have hit the 443 mark extending to Ndola since the Lusaka outbreak. This far the scourge has been largely prevalent in Lusaka with Bauleni and Kanyama townships hit hardest. Sadly the only response from the government was a statement from the Local Government and Housing Minister Stephen Kampyongo announcing that the sale of foodstuffs by vendors on the streets had to be suspended in light of the cholera outbreak. Nothing about efforts to clean up the country, just reacting to symptoms to unhygienic conditions.Contaminated water, unhygienic handling and poor food preparations are among factors that aid rapid spread of cholera. Its high mortality rate is evidenced by the number of cases being reported in the media. Access to hygienic drinking water in Zambia is limited by low investment in the sector, drought, and poor planning, that has seen demand for water outstrip supply for years. Cholera benefits from these...Cholera is not a tropical disease. Low standards of hygiene and quality of drinking water makes it prevalent in the tropics, parts of Asia and the Americas. In the 19th century, cholera outbreaks were common in the United States of America and Britain. Improvements in health standards, particularly drinking water and the availability of flushing toilets have distanced human waste - a great source of the disease - from water sources and made cholera a rarity in those regions.Areas where flooding destroys toilet facilities and inject their contents into public water sources are prone to cholera. It is little wonder that the disease has facility to spread in Zambia. In many places, water for domestic use is contaminated by poorly disposed human wastes. Yet cholera, according to the WHO, ""is an easily treatable disease. The prompt administration of oral rehydration salts to replace lost fluids nearly always results in cure. In especially severe cases, intravenous administration of fluids may be required to save the patient's life. Left untreated, however, cholera can kill quickly following the onset of symptoms. ""Water management is critical. While routine preaching about use of safe water persists, the reality is that millions of Zambians lack access to clean water. It is advisable to boil water, and avoid ice blocks that could have been made with water from doubtful sources. The cholera bacteria are known to survive the freezing process. Food needs to be cooked properly and human waste disposed in ways that would not contaminate water sources. The good, old benefits of washing hands after using toilets are still important to curtail the spread of cholera and other diseases. - Mod.LL]******[4] Cholera - Dominican Republic (Dajabon Province)Date: Sun 2 Apr 2016Source: Noticias Sin [edited]<www.noticiassin.com/2016/04/investigan-otros-casos-sospechosos-de-colera-en-dajabon/>Public Health authorities have followed up and provided assistance to residents of the community of El Aguacate, in Dajabon, where several cases of cholera, at least 14, emerged said Dr. Ceballos, provincial director of Public Health. Dr. Sanchez Espinal, the provincial epidemiologist, said staff moved to the community to take samples and detect contamination in that area.[Byline: CÌ©sar Montesinos]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[DajabÌ n is a province of the Dominican Republic, on the border with Haiti and can be seen on a map at: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dajab%C3%B3n_Province>. - Mod.LL[Prevention of cholera is primarily done with safe water/sanitation systems well demonstrated by the lack of cholera spread when introduced by travel into countries with clean water. Vaccination against cholera can also be useful. The use of a cholera vaccine during an ongoing outbreak was 1st demonstrated to be effective during an outbreak in the African country of Guinea in 2012 and reported in 2014:The publication with its citation and abstract is:Luquero FJ, Grout L, Ciglenecki, I, et al: Use of _Vibrio cholerae_ Vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea. N Engl J Med 2014; 370: 2111-20; <http://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJMoa1312680>.Background----------""The use of vaccines to prevent and control cholera is currently under debate. Shanchol is one of the 2 oral cholera vaccines prequalified by the World Health Organization; however, its effectiveness under field conditions and the protection it confers in the 1st months after administration remain unknown. The main objective of this study was to estimate the short-term effectiveness of 2 doses of Shanchol used as a part of the integrated response to a cholera outbreak in Africa.Methods-------We conducted a matched case-control study in Guinea between 20 May 2012 and 19 Oct 2012. Suspected cholera cases were confirmed by means of a rapid test, and controls were selected among neighbors of the same age and sex as the case patients. The odds of vaccination were compared between case patients and controls in bivariate and adjusted conditional logistic-regression models. Vaccine effectiveness was calculated as (1-odds ratio) X 100.Results-------Between 8 Jun 2012 and 19 Oct 2012, we enrolled 40 case patients and 160 controls in the study for the primary analysis. After adjustment for potentially confounding variables, vaccination with 2 complete doses was associated with significant protection against cholera (effectiveness, 86.6 percent; 95 percent confidence interval, 56.7 to 95.8; P=0.001).Conclusions-----------In this study, Shanchol was effective when used in response to a cholera outbreak in Guinea. This study provides evidence supporting the addition of vaccination as part of the response to an outbreak. It also supports the ongoing efforts to establish a cholera vaccine stockpile for emergency use, which would enhance outbreak prevention and control strategies.""Although these are small numbers, the investigators working in way less than ideal conditions should be lauded for this study, which may be the ""straw that broke the camel's back"" regarding using a cholera vaccine during an ongoing outbreak of _V. cholerae_.The biologic used, Shanchol (produced in India), contains killed different biotypes of bacilli of both O1 and O139 serotypes. In a large study in Kolkata, India, a cluster-randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study revealed a cumulative efficacy of the product at 5 years of 65 percent (95 percent CI [confidence interval] 52-74), with significant protection at the p less than 0.0001 level (1). The other WHO prequalified vaccine, Dukoral, produced in Sweden, contained several biotypes of O1 only together with recombinant cholera toxin B subunit.As a review, the cholera toxin, encoded by the ctxA and ctxB genes, is the principal toxin produced by _V. cholerae_ O1 and O139 and is responsible for the disease. The genes are encoded with a filamentous bacteriophage. The toxin has many immunological properties that include impressive adjuvant properties and action as an anti-inflammatory agent. Each toxin molecule contains a catalytic A subunit (the active toxin) and 5 B subunits that bind the holotoxin to its ganglioside GM1 receptor. After internalization, a subunit of A, A1, will catalyze the ribosylation of a GTP-binding protein which increases the activation of adenyl cyclase and a chloride channel CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) which produces increased chloride secretion, intestinal water accumulation and diarrhea. It is mutations in CFTR that produces cystic fibrosis, a disease that affects a number of organs related to difficulties in fluid secretion (2).References----------1. Bhattacharya SK, Sur D, Ali M, et al: 5 year efficacy of a bivalent killed whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in Kolkata, India: a cluster-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2013; 13(12): 1050-6; available at <http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(13)70273-1/fulltext>.2. Lutwick LI, Preis J: Cholera. In, Tropical Pediatrics: A Public Health Concern of International Proportions. NovaBiomedical, New York, 2014 (in press). - Mod.LL]
