Kuensel [edited]<http://www.kuenselonline.com/hand-foot-mouth-disease-detected-in-four-more-dzongkhags/>More than 100 children are suspected to have hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) as of 31 Mar 2016 in 4 dzongkhags, not including Thimphu. However, not all cases were confirmed to be HFMD.On 26 Mar 2016, Nobding lower secondary school (LSS) in Wangdue reported 12 female students displaying symptoms similar to HFMD. The school's principal, Kelzang Wangyal, said that the girls were immediately isolated from the rest of the students, with health officials consulted in the nearest basic health unit (BHU). Health officials from the Bajo regional hospital ruled out HFMD, and the girls were found to be suffering from allergies. ""All the girls recovered the next day after the case was reported and are now attending their regular classes,"" Kelzang Wangyal said.Bikhar LSS in Trashigang also reported that 27 students were suffering from fever, headache and sores in the mouth. BLSS's health in-charge Sungyel said that while HFMD has not been confirmed, the students were isolated.Meanwhile, Lingmithang primary school in Mongar sent 2 students home yesterday [3 Apr 2016]. A total of 48 cases have been recorded there so far. The primary school's health in-charge, Saha Dev Rai, said that 2 students of the 48 have recovered and are attending regular classes, while others are still on leave. ""I personally go to students during lunch break and ask them to wash hands with soap before eating their packed-lunch,"" the health in-charge said. All the class teachers are asked to check their students for symptoms.Changjiji satellite clinic reported 4 cases, while the Motithang satellite clinic and Genekha BHU reported 2 cases each. Bumthang hospital also reported 21 cases from Chamkhar. Thimphu schools alone reported 85 cases between 19-31 Mar [2016]. Children suffering from the disease are aged between 5 and 11 years.[Byline: Dechen Tshomo]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Until 1956, Bhutan had 9 provinces, but currently the country is divided into 20 dzongkhags. A dzongkhag is an administrative and judicial district of Bhutan.Hand, foot, and mouth disease is often confused with foot-and-mouth disease (also called hoof-and-mouth disease), which affects cattle, sheep, and swine. However, the 2 diseases are caused by different viruses and are not related. Hoof and mouth disease is caused by a picornavirus, the prototypical member of the _Aphthovirus_ genus. Hand, foot, and mouth disease, on the other hand, is caused by an enterovirus, most commonly coxsackievirus A16. However, other enteroviruses (such as coxsackievirus A10) can cause hand, foot, and mouth disease. Recently, coxsackievirus A6 has been detected in outbreaks. Internationally, enterovirus 71 is a common etiologic agent.Hand, foot, and mouth disease is a common illness in young children, with worldwide distribution. Recent large outbreaks have been reported in Cambodia, China, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Taiwan, and Viet Nam [excerpted from <http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2016/infectious-diseases-related-to-travel/hand-foot-mouth-disease>].Hand, foot, and mouth disease is spread from person to person through coughing and sneezing, or contact with blister fluid or feces (stool) of an infected person. Risk of infection is decreased by:- Washing your hands often with soap and water- Disinfecting dirty surfaces and soiled items- Avoiding close contact such as kissing, hugging, or sharing eating utensils or cups with infected peopleNo vaccine existed before December 2015, but in December 2015, the China FDA approved the 1st vaccine against the virus, Enterovirus 71 (EV71), made by the Institute of Medical Biology at the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. A 2nd vaccine against the virus developed by Sinovac came out in January 2016. See ProMED-mail post ""Hand, foot & mouth disease - China: (BJ, GX) vaccine 20160329.4124126."" - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/154>.]
