The Telegraph [edited]<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/2016/04/07/flu-jab-blunder-fuelled-biggest-spike-in-deaths-since-1960s/>The flu jab blunder [i.e., mismatch between strains included in the seasonal vaccine and strains that actually circulate. I wouldn't call this a blunder but rather an inability to predict the future with complete accuracy. - Mod.LM] contributed to the largest spike in deaths in a generation, new figures from the Office for National Statistics have shown.An additional 28 189 people died last year [2015] compared with 2014, the largest percentage increase since 1968. The majority of the excess deaths, 24 000, were people aged over 75, many of whom died from flu or dementia. There were 16 415 excess deaths last winter, with flu likely to be a major explanatory factor compared to 577 the previous year.The number of deaths in England and Wales was so high that it has lowered life expectancy for girls born this year [2016] by 2 months to 79.3, and boys by 3 months to 82.9, the 1st fall in 2 decades.Last year [2015], Public Health England (PHE) warned that the main strain of influenza in circulation had mutated unexpectedly. But by then, it was too late to change the vaccine formula even though it meant the jab was largely ineffective.The mutated strain, A(H3N2), was particularly lethal to the elderly, and the jab was found to work in just one in 3 adults, compared to the 50 per cent that it usually protects. Today [7 Apr 2016], PHE admitted that the mismatched flu jab had fuelled the rise in deaths.Flu is miserable for younger people but can be lethal for the elderly and vulnerable. Dr. Richard Pebody, head of flu surveillance for Public Health England, said: ""In any flu season dominated by an H3 subtype, unfortunately, we can expect the burden of illness to be seen particularly in the elderly, including increased levels of excess mortality, even in a season where the vaccine is well matched to the circulating strains. Although in most winters, the vaccine is well matched, winter 2014/15 saw the circulation of a drifted H3 flu strain, making the vaccine less effective than the typical 50 per cent we had seen in recent previous years. It is possible that this contributed to the increase in excess mortality. The flu vaccine is updated every year, and it is crucial that we remember that vaccination remains the best protection we have against the unpredictable flu virus.""Prof Jonathan Ball, a virologist from the University of Nottingham, said it was a ""very reasonable assumption"" that the extra deaths were linked to problems with the flu jab. The ONS and PHE were so concerned about the large rise in deaths that they commissioned a special analysis to find out what was responsible.Last year [2015], there were 529 613 deaths registered in England and Wales, an increase of 28 189, or 5.6 per cent. It is the largest percentage rise since 1968, when death rates rose by 6.3 per cent. It is also the largest number of deaths since 2003, when 539 151 people died.Some 86 per cent of extra deaths occurred in the over 75s and 38 per cent in the over 90s. Even in patients suffering Alzheimer's or dementia, flu was linked to 1/3rd of the cases.At the height of the crisis in the winter of 2015, GPs were urged to prescribe antiviral drugs to prevent cases in the most vulnerable and in care homes where viruses are spreading. The lethal A(H3N2) strain swept through care homes last winter.Claudia Wells, Head of Mortality Analysis at ONS, said: ""The majority of the increase in deaths in 2015 happened during the 1st few months of the year, coinciding with an increase in hospital admissions for flu and reports of numerous outbreaks of the virus in care homes. Respiratory diseases, such as flu, were also mentioned in 1/3rd of deaths from dementia and Alzheimer's last year [2015]. The number of deaths where dementia and Alzheimer's were listed as the underlying cause have been steadily increasing over the last 15 years but were well above the 5 year average in 2015.""Professor John Newton, Chief Knowledge Officer at Public Health England added: ""An outbreak of flu can have a big impact, especially on those who are most vulnerable or experiencing other illnesses, such as dementia. An increase in deaths will generally lead to a decrease in life expectancy that year, but we have seen these annual fluctuations before, and the overall trend has remained positive.""Deaths remained close to the 5-year average in the 1st 12 weeks of 2016, and the large increase in deaths in the early part of 2015 was not repeated in the early part of 2016.The decision about which strains of flu are likely to be circulating are taken 12 months before the winter flu season by the World Health Organisation, with different vaccines recommended for the Northern and Southern hemispheres. It takes from February through to September to produce sufficient quantities of the flu vaccine. And if a change in the virus is detected once production has started, it is not possible to change it. However, Public Health England said this year's [2016] vaccine looked like it would match the most dominant strain.[Byline: Sarah Knapton]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The World Health Organization's (WHO) recommendations on the composition of influenza virus vaccines are typically available in February of each year for the upcoming season. The WHO recommends that, where available, seasonal quadrivalent influenza vaccines contain the recommended 3 viruses for the trivalent vaccine as well as the influenza B virus lineage that is not included in the trivalent vaccine.Influenza vaccine has been shown to be efficacious, with higher efficacy demonstrated against laboratory-confirmed influenza than clinically defined outcomes. Immunization has been shown to reduce the number of physician visits, hospitalizations and deaths in high-risk adults.CDC conducts studies to measure the benefits of seasonal flu vaccination each flu season to help determine how well flu vaccines are working. These vaccine effectiveness (VE) studies regularly assess and confirm the value of flu vaccination as a public health intervention. Study results of vaccine effectiveness can vary based on study design, outcome(s) measured, population studied, and the season in which the flu vaccine was studied.The end season analysis for 2014-15 by CDC concluded that most (over 80 percent) influenza A/H3N2 viruses tested at CDC were antigenically different from the 2014-15 vaccine component, and several genetic groups of H3N2 viruses co-circulated [<http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2015-06/flu-02-flannery.pdf>].The 2014-15 vaccine contained an influenza A/H3N2 strain that did not match well with the viruses seen in the actual flu season, as mentioned in this report. A look at the influenza data for the 2015-16 season on WHO's FluNet page [<http://gamapserver.who.int/gareports/Default.aspx?ReportNo=1>] shows a predominance of influenza A/H3N2 viruses this year [2016] as well. However, the vaccine efficacy data from the recent flu season is not available as of yet for comparison, although the selected H3N2 strain was found to be a better match with the circulating viruses. - Mod.UBA]
