RT.com [edited]<https://www.rt.com/usa/339365-usa-schools-water-lead-levels/>Flint, Michigan has become the epicenter of the lead water crisis in the United States, but hundreds of schools across the country have tested positive for unsafe lead levels in their water over the past 3 years, according to a new report.In fact, 278 schools violated the safety levels for lead created by the Environmental Protection Agency since 2013, the Associated Press [AP] reported, citing its analysis of government data. In the past year alone, 64 schools tested for unsafe water.About 90 schools had lead levels in the water that were at least double what the federal government considers acceptable, according to the data. The EPA states that lead levels over 15 parts per billion are unsafe ad require action.Even these statistics may offer only a snapshot of the situation, since the data come from schools and daycare centers that are required to test their water for lead. 90 percent of schools in the US get their water from municipal systems, meaning local officials are responsible for testing the water at separate locations. If a school has its own water system, it's responsible for testing, though a facility can be declared safe even if one drinking fountain is delivering unsafe water, AP reported.The good news is that the source of the problem is fairly easy to pinpoint. Generally, lead gets into the water at buildings and schools that are older and were built to feature lead delivery pipes. The water can leach lead off the pipes and become contaminated, particularly over weekends when sinks and drinking fountains aren't being used.The bad news is that replacing lead pipes can be extremely expensive, and many schools simply cannot afford to do so. One elementary school in Ringle, Wisconsin tore out its drinking fountains more than 10 years ago and decided simply to start buying bottled water for its students, citing the extreme cost of replacing pipes. ""For the cost of that, you might as well build a new school,"" Jack Stoskopf, an assistant superintendent, told AP.Half of the schools with unsafe water level readings are located on the East Coast, where buildings tend to be older and lead pipes more commonly found. Pennsylvania, Maine, and New Jersey were at the top of the list.In March [2016], sinks and water fountains at 30 of 66 schools in Newark, New Jersey were ordered to be shut off after testing indicated they were delivering unsafe water. The high lead levels were known about as far back as 6 years ago, according to the New York Times, but they were generally dealt with by adding water filters or replacing faucets. Health officials said they would test about 17 000 students for potential lead poisoning.Elsewhere in New Jersey, 2 schools in Hamilton just recently detected lead levels in the water that are unsafe.In Boston, only 37 schools still use tap water as a drinking option. All the others bring in bottled water for students due to concerns over lead.Lawmakers at the state and federal levels have proposed expanding testing at schools and other buildings to ensure that water is safe. In Michigan, where the state is still reeling from the Flint crisis, Republican Governor Rick Snyder recently proposed establishing limits for lead levels that are stricter than the EPA's.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[If the schools are testing positive for lead, then it is likely most of the communities in the area are also testing positive. This article does not tell us the levels of lead, but likely they are high enough to cause problems.While this article mentions the Northeastern USA, it is likely much farther throughout the US as lead pipes and most water drinking systems all stemmed from ""what was in use"" at the time something else was constructed. Consequently, this problem is very likely far and wide throughout the USA.Sadly, municipal drinking water systems are not tested for lead, other metals, and antibiotics. Some chemicals are tested for, but so many other components are not.CDC determined that lead concentrations in drinking water should be below the EPA action level of 15 parts per billion; because no safe blood level has been identified for young children, all sources of lead exposure for children should be controlled or eliminated (<http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/tips/water.htm>).Lead is a metal that occurs naturally in the earth's crust, but human activity -- mining, burning fossil fuels, and manufacturing -- has caused it to become more widespread. Lead was also once a key ingredient in paint and gasoline and is still used in batteries, solder, pipes, pottery, roofing materials, and some cosmetics.Lead poisoning occurs when lead builds up in the body, often over a period of months or years. Even small amounts of lead can cause serious health problems. Children under the age of 6 are especially vulnerable to lead poisoning, which can severely affect mental and physical development. At very high levels, lead poisoning can be fatal.There is a long list of ways to encounter lead:- Houses painted before 1978. Even if the paint is not peeling, it can be a problem. Lead paint is very dangerous when it is being stripped or sanded. These actions release fine lead dust into the air. Infants and children living in pre-1960's housing (when paint often contained lead) have the highest risk of lead poisoning. Small children often swallow paint chips or dust from lead-based paint.- Toys and furniture painted before 1976.- Painted toys and decorations made outside the US.- Lead bullets, fishing sinkers, curtain weights.- Plumbing, pipes, and faucets. Lead can be found in drinking water in homes containing pipes that were connected with lead solder. Although new building codes require lead-free solder, lead is still found in some modern faucets.- Soil contaminated by decades of car exhaust or years of house paint scrapings. Lead is more common in soil near highways and houses.- Hobbies involving soldering, stained glass, jewelry making, pottery glazing, and miniature lead figures (always look at labels).- Children's paint sets and art supplies (always look at labels).- Pewter pitchers and dinnerware.- Storage batteries.Children get lead in their bodies when they put lead objects in their mouths, especially if they swallow those objects. They can also get lead poison on their fingers from touching a dusty or peeling lead object, and then putting their fingers in their mouths or eating food afterwards. Children also can breathe in tiny amounts of lead.Symptoms--------There are many possible symptoms of lead poisoning. Lead can affect many different parts of the body. A single high dose of lead can cause severe emergency symptoms.However, it is more common for lead poisoning to build up slowly over time. This occurs from repeated exposure to small amounts of lead. In this case, there may not be any obvious symptoms. Over time, even low levels of lead exposure can harm a child's mental development. The health problems get worse as the level of lead in the blood gets higher.Symptoms of lead poisoning may include:- Abdominal pain and cramping (usually the 1st sign of a high, toxic dose of lead poison)- Aggressive behavior- Anemia- Constipation- Difficulty getting pregnant- Difficulty sleeping- Headaches- Hearing loss- Irritability- Loss of previous developmental skills (in young children)- Low appetite and energy- Reduced sensationsVery high levels of lead may cause vomiting, staggering walk, muscle weakness, seizures, or coma.Lead is much more harmful to children than adults because it can affect their developing nerves and brains. The younger the child, the more harmful lead can be. Unborn children are the most vulnerable.Possible complications include:- Behavior or attention problems- Failure at school- Hearing problems- Kidney damage- Reduced IQ- Slowed body growthExposure to even low levels of lead can cause damage over time, especially in children. The greatest risk is to brain development, where irreversible damage may occur. Higher levels can damage the kidneys and nervous system in both children and adults. Very high lead levels may cause seizures, unconsciousness, and possibly death.People with higher lead levels have a greater risk of long-lasting health problems. They must be followed carefully. Their nerves and muscles can be greatly affected and may no longer function as well as they should. Other body systems may be harmed to various degrees, such as the kidneys and blood vessels. People who survive toxic lead levels may have some permanent brain damage. Children are more vulnerable to serious long-term problems.A complete recovery from chronic lead poisoning may take months to years (<https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/002473.htm>).Alternative names for lead poisoning are plumbism, colica pictorum, saturnism, Devon colic, or painter's colic (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lead_poisoning>).Doctors usually use a simple blood test to detect lead poisoning. A small blood sample is taken from a finger prick or from a vein. Lead levels in the blood are measured in micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL). A level of 5 mcg/dL or higher indicates your child may have unsafe levels of lead in their blood and should have their blood tested periodically. If levels become too high -- generally 45 mcg/dL or higher -- your child should be treated.The 1st step in treating all degrees of lead poisoning is to remove the source of the contamination. If you can't remove lead from your environment, you may at least be able to reduce the likelihood that it will cause problems. For instance, sometimes it's better to seal in rather than remove old lead paint. Your local health department can recommend ways to identify and reduce lead in your home and community.For children and adults with relatively low lead levels, simply avoiding exposure to lead may be enough to reduce blood lead levels.For more severe cases, your doctor may recommend:- Chelation therapy. In this treatment, you take a medication that binds with the lead so that it's excreted in your urine.- EDTA therapy. Doctors treat adults with lead levels greater than 45 mcg/dL of blood with one or more of 3 drugs, most commonly a chemical called ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, or edetic acid). Depending on your lead level, you may need more than one treatment. In such severe cases, however, it may not be possible to reverse damage that has already occurred.Children may need chelation therapy at lower levels than adults do.References from the US NIH (National Institutes of Health):1. Velez LI, O'Connell EJ: Heavy metals. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014: chap 157.2. Woolf AD, Goldman R, Bellinger DC: Update on the clinical management of childhood lead poisoning. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2007; 54(2): 271-94; abstract available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17448360>.Portions of this comment were extracted from:<http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/tips/water.htm>, <https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/002473.htm>, and <http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/basics/complications/con-20035487>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
