WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/13-april-2016-yellow-fever-angola/en/>Yellow fever - Angola---------------------On 21 Jan 2016, the National IHR Focal Point of Angola notified WHO of an outbreak of yellow fever (YF). The 1st case with onset date on 5 Dec 2015 was identified in Viana municipality, Luanda province.As of 7 Apr 2016, a total of 1708 suspected cases, including 238 deaths (CFR [case fatality rate]: 13.9 percent), had been reported from 16 of the country's 18 provinces. Luanda remains the most affected province with 1135 cases (405 confirmed), including 165 deaths (CFR: 14.5 percent). The other most affected provinces are Huambo (266 suspected cases, 37 deaths), Huila (95 suspected cases, 16 deaths), and Benguela (51 suspected cases, 0 deaths). Between 6 and 7 Apr 2016, 30 new suspected cases, including 4 deaths, were reported across the country -- 19 of these suspected cases and 2 of the reported deaths came from Luanda.A total of 581 cases have been laboratory confirmed in 59 districts of 12 provinces. Luanda province, the epicentre of the outbreak, accounts for 70 percent of the confirmed cases (405 cases). Other provinces with a high number of confirmed cases include Huambo (73 cases), Huila (27 cases), Benguela (22 cases), and Kuanza Sul (11 cases). From 6 to 7 Apr 2016, 30 new confirmed cases were reported from Luanda (19), Huambo (4), Cuanza Sul (2), Cunene (2), Bengo (1), Lunda Norte (1), and Uige (1). The number of laboratory confirmed cases in provinces other than Luanda continues to increase. The risk of spread to other provinces and to neighbouring countries remains very high.Transmission of the disease is no longer restricted to Luanda. As of 7 Apr 2016, the National Final Classification Committee had confirmed local transmission in 5 other provinces (Benguela, Cuanza Sul, Huambo, Huila, and Uige) and in a total of 10 districts.In addition, international spread of the disease has already been documented. Recent imported cases of YF have in fact been detected in China, Kenya, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).Public health response----------------------A national task force established by the government of Angola is leading the response to the outbreak. On 29 Mar 2016, WHO graded the outbreak as a level 2 emergency on the Emergency Response Framework (ERF) grading scale -- the ERF grading scale has 3 levels [see grade definitions at <http://www.who.int/hac/about/erf_.pdf>]. WHO and partner organizations, including UNICEF, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, M̩decins Sans Fronti̬res (MSF), and M̩dicos del Mundo, are providing assistance with the coordination of the response. An incident manager has been appointed at WHO and 65 WHO multidisciplinary experts have been deployed to provide high-level technical support to the country.Between 3 and 6 Apr 2016, the WHO Director General, the WHO Regional Director for Africa, and the WHO AFRO Health Security and Emergencies cluster Director visited Angola to assess the ongoing response and provide high-level leadership support. The delegation met the Minister of Health, other Government Officials, and His Excellency the President of the Republic of Angola. Decisions were made to take necessary measures to end the outbreak by 15 May 2016.Interventions are ongoing to enhance surveillance. These include epidemiological investigation, data management, early detection and confirmation of cases, as well as final classification of cases by an established classification committee. Experts from Cuba are providing technical support to the country with the training of vector control specialists.The immunization campaign in Luanda, which started on 2 Feb 2016 in Viana municipality, has been completed in 7 out of the province's 12 districts and is still ongoing in the remaining 5 districts. As of 7 Apr 2016, a total of 5 892 901 (90 percent) people had been vaccinated in Luanda. Preparation has started for the upcoming yellow fever vaccination campaign in 2 districts of Huambo and 3 of Benguela. On 7 Apr 2016, the International Coordinating Group (ICG) for Vaccine Provision released 1.9 million vaccine doses. The social mobilization activities are being reinforced. Radio, TV, and other media are being used to raise public awareness and encourage people to get vaccinated, with a special focus on vulnerable areas in all districts of Luanda.The United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) has approved a request of 3 million dollars to support the purchase of vaccines. In addition, the government of Angola has committed USD 15 million for the purchase of the yellow fever vaccine in addition to the payment of 50 percent of the cost of the vaccines already received for the province of Luanda.Current challenges include the need for vaccines to complete reactive immunization, the control of the geographical spread of the outbreak within the country and to neighbouring countries. There are also needs for more operational funds, adequate and sufficient vector control interventions to improve response activities in the other provinces. A close follow-up of preparedness measures in neighbouring countries is required to ensure the timely detection and management of any imported cases.WHO risk assessment-------------------The evolution of the situation in Angola is concerning and needs to be closely monitored. The reports of imported cases of YF in China, DRC, and Kenya demonstrate that this outbreak constitutes a potential threat for the entire world. There is a risk for the further spread of the disease in view of the large international communities residing in Angola and the frequent travel activities with neighbouring and overseas countries. Furthermore, all countries where the mosquito vector (_Aedes_ species) is present are at risk, notably those endemic for or previously affected by outbreaks of dengue, chikungunya, or Zika virus and other arboviruses. Therefore, there is an urgent need to strengthen the quality of the response in Angola and to enhance preparedness activities in neighbouring countries and in countries that have diaspora communities in Angola. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conduct risk assessment based on the latest available information.WHO advice----------WHO urges Members States especially those where the establishment of a local cycle of transmission is possible (that is, where the _Aedes_ mosquitoes are present) to strengthen the control of immunization status of travellers to all potentially endemic areas and the surveillance of potential YF cases.In the context of an ongoing YF outbreak in Angola, special attention should also be placed on travellers returning from Angola and other potentially endemic areas. Travellers, particularly those arriving in Asia from Africa or Latin America should always have a certificate of YF vaccination. If there are medical grounds for not getting vaccinated, the International Health Regulations (2005) state that this must be certified by the appropriate authorities.WHO does not recommend any restriction of travel and trade to Angola based on the current information available.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp[The number of YF cases in Angola continues to increase, and with that, the risk of spread to other countries continues. It is not clear what the responses will be for YF control in the provinces, other than continuation in Luanda and the initiation of an effort in Huambo (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20160412.4155494) and Benguela.Of concern is availability of an adequate number of doses of YF vaccine for all the provinces. WHO has indicated that its emergency vaccine stockpile has now been completely exhausted (<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/04/angolan-yellow-fever-outbreak-highlights-dangerous-vaccine-shortage>), but it has managed to find 3 million more doses. However, unless there is authorization to reduce the volume per dose to extend the number available, there is not enough vaccine to cover the remaining 18 million people in Angola. Dose volume reduction in emergency situations is a viable approach to extend coverage of the population (Ref: Campi-Azevedo AC, de Almeida Estevam P, Coelho-Dos-Reis JG, et al: Subdoses of 17DD yellow fever vaccine elicit equivalent virological/immunological kinetics timeline. BMC Infect Dis. 2014 Jul 15; 14:391. <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4223624/>]. Ending the outbreak by the declared date of 15 May 2016 -- just a month away -- will be a challenge.Maps of Angola can be accessed at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/angola.pdf> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/165>. - Mod.TY]
