British Medical Journal (BMJ 2016; 353: i1901) [edited]<http://www.bmj.com/content/353/bmj.i1901>Ref: de Fatima Vasco Aragao M, van der Linden V, Brainer-Lima AM, et al: Clinical features and neuroimaging (CT and MRI) findings in presumed Zika virus related congenital infection and microcephaly: retrospective case series study BMJ 2016; 353 :i1901Abstract--------Objective: to report radiological findings observed in computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the 1st cases of congenital infection and microcephaly presumably associated with the Zika virus in the current Brazilian epidemic.Design: retrospective study with a case series.Setting: Association for Assistance of Disabled Children (AACD), Pernambuco state, Brazil.Participants: 23 children with a diagnosis of congenital infection presumably associated with the Zika virus during the Brazilian microcephaly epidemic.Main outcome measures: types of abnormalities and the radiological pattern of lesions identified on CT and MRI brain scans.Results: 6 of the 23 children tested positive for IgM antibodies to Zika virus in cerebrospinal fluid. The other 17 children met the protocol criteria for congenital infection presumably associated with the Zika virus, even without being tested for IgM antibodies to the virus -- the test was not yet available on a routine basis. Of the 23 children, 15 underwent CT, 7 underwent both CT and MRI, and one underwent MRI. Of the 22 children who underwent CT, all had calcifications in the junction between cortical and subcortical white matter, 21 (95 percent) had malformations of cortical development, 20 (91 percent) had a decreased brain volume, 19 (86 percent) had ventriculomegaly, and 11 (50 percent) had hypoplasia of the cerebellum or brainstem. Of the 8 children who underwent MRI, all had calcifications in the junction between cortical and subcortical white matter, malformations of cortical development occurring predominantly in the frontal lobes, and ventriculomegaly. 7 of the 8 (88 percent) children had enlarged cisterna magna, 7 (88 percent) delayed myelination, and 6 each (75 percent) a moderate to severe decrease in brain volume, simplified gyral pattern, and abnormalities of the corpus callosum (38 percent hypogenesis and 38 percent hypoplasia). Malformations were symmetrical in 75 percent of the cases.Conclusion: Severe cerebral damage was found on imaging in most of the children in this case series with congenital infection presumably associated with the Zika virus. The features most commonly found were brain calcifications in the junction between cortical and subcortical white matter associated with malformations of cortical development, often with a simplified gyral pattern and predominance of pachygyria or polymicrogyria in the frontal lobes. Additional findings were enlarged cisterna magna, abnormalities of corpus callosum (hypoplasia or hypogenesis), ventriculomegaly, delayed myelination, and hypoplasia of the cerebellum and the brainstem.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides a radiological assessment of the earliest cases of microcephaly in Pernambuco state, Brazil, done by an interdisciplinary team of clinicians. It corresponds to a similar study entitled, ""Computed tomographic findings in microcephaly associated with Zika virus"" published in the 6 Apr 2016 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine (see ProMED-mail archive no 20160411.4152933). Subsequent studies have led the USA CDC and others to conclude that there is a causal relationship between in utero Zika virus infection and the kinds of lesions that the report above describes. It would not be surprising if reports of similar studies done with patients early in the outbreak begin to emerge. Subscribers interested in the details of this study are encouraged to read the entire article. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>.]
