Huffington Post [edited]<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/crystal-wells/the-baghdad-boil-fighting_b_9670666.html>When Z.'s family heard Islamic State ISIL forces had captured the nearby northern Iraqi town of Sinjar in the summer of 2014, they fled their home with just the clothes on their backs. Like tens of thousands of other members of an ethno-religious minority known as Yazidis, they set off on foot to seek refuge in the mountains not far away, their children in their arms and Z. pregnant with their 7th child. ""ISIL saw us and shot at us, but we kept moving ""Z. recalls, referring to the terrorist group Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, which views Yazidis as heretics, who should be killed.They walked for 8 days straight with barely any food or water until they reached the top of Mount Sinjar [Iraq], where they stayed briefly before pressing on to the relative safety of Iraq's Kurdistan Region. A year and half later, the family of 9 now lives alongside other Yazidis in an unfinished concrete building in Siji [Dahuk (Dohuk) governorate, Kurdistan, Iraq], a village of roughly 8000 people perched on a hillside. It was here that Z. and 3 of her children started to see mysterious, painful sores emerge on their hands. ""After just 10 days living here we started to see small spots on our hands,"" Z. says. ""I didn't know what it was until the community health worker came."" Like them, the community health worker (CHW), Jalal, had settled in Siji after being forced from his home by the ISIL attack on Sinjar.He is one of 4 CHWs that International Medical Corps recruited and trained in Siji to educate families like Z.'s about common health issues, including a flesh parasite that causes skin ulcers known as leishmaniasis. The parasite that produces leishmaniasis is spread through the bites of sandflies. The kind commonly found in Iraq, known locally as the ""Baghdad boil,"" is cutaneous leishmaniasis, which creates skin ulcers that can leave lifetime scars.There are as many as 1.3 million cases reported annually around the world, according to the World Health Organization, and is commonly found in displacement crises among those who live in close proximity to one another in poor housing conditions. Siji is no exception. Most of the people who live in Siji are Yazidi, like Z., a minority that makes up just 1.5 percent of Iraq's 33 million people.Thousands of Yazidis were slaughtered and kidnapped by ISIL (also known as ISIS) when they attacked Sinjar on [3 Aug 2014]. Others died later after they were trapped on Mount Sinjar with little food or water. Those who survived are now displaced from their homes and many of them have sought refuge in camps and unfinished buildings like those in Siji.When the International Medical Corps set up a mobile medical unit (MMU) in Siji roughly one year ago, leishmaniasis was one of the most common health issues people sought care for. ""We have seen at least 60 cases of leishmaniasis since we started working here,"" says Dr Moamer Abdulghafordr Agha. ""We are seeing less and less. In March [2016], we saw just 4 cases."" The main reason for the decline, Dr Moamar says, is improved access to treatment through the MMU. At first, the MMU would have to refer people to a government hospital about 30 minutes away to get the injectable medicine that is the most effective remedy for leishmaniasis. The treatment also requires multiple follow up visits, which meant families had to travel back and forth from the hospital a number of times before they were cured. As soon as International Medical Corps had a steady supply of the drug, they could administer it at the MMU, making it much more easily available to the Yazidi families living in Siji.When the injectable medicine arrived, Jalal visited Z. and suggested that she and her 3 children, all of whom had sores, visit the MMU. ""After a week it started to go away,"" she says. ""It is cured now.""""The CHWs are the link between families and our clinics,"" says Alexander Bartoloni, Regional Community Health Advisor for International Medical Corps. ""They are a part of the communities themselves and are able to improve health on a grassroots level by going door-to-door and talking to people about any health issues affecting them. They also look out for symptoms of common diseases, like leishmaniasis, and connect the family with our doctors and nurses who can then treat it.""[Byline: Crystal Wells]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Cutaneous leishmaniasis, CL, is increasing and out of control in Syria and Iraq, both in areas controlled by the so called ""Islamic State"" and among government troops (see ProMED reports below). It is a huge problem in Syrian refugees including -- as described in this report -- the Yazidis (an ethnic and religious minority mainly scattered across northwest Iraq, northwest Syria, and southeast Turkey. They have been denounced and persecuted as infidels). The relief organizations should be highly praised for their efforts, but increased vector and reservoir control is needed for long term reduction in morbidity, which have to wait for peace in the area. - Mod.EPMaps of Iraq can be seen at <http://tinyurl.com/jn47ma8> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/25542>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
