Hindustan Times [edited]<http://www.hindustantimes.com/world/500-kids-fall-ill-at-chinese-school-built-on-toxic-soil-report/story-KIn4VUbf89WLNC97tdxALJ.html>China's central government said on Monday [18 Apr 2016] that it will investigate a report [which says] that close to 500 students are suffering from serious diseases including cancer at a school built near recently shut chemical plants in eastern China.State broadcaster CCTV reported on Sunday [17 Apr 2016] that high concentrations of some toxic chemicals may have caused cases of lymphoma and leukemia among students at the Foreign Languages School in the city of Changzhou, about 170 km (105 miles) north west of Shanghai.The education ministry said on Monday [18 Apr 2016] that it has sent a team to investigate, while local officials in Jiangsu province said they will re-examine the issue after initially denying any soil quality issues in interviews with CCTV. The broadcaster said school and local officials may have only tested the site for common pollutants but overlooked chemicals and heavy metals involved in pesticide manufacturing next to the school site. The ministry ""attaches the greatest importance"" to the reported problems and is committed to ""safeguarding students' physical and mental wellbeing,"" it said on its official microblog.The case underscored the severity of China's groundwater pollution just one week after the ministry of water resources published findings showing that more than 80 per cent of water in shallow groundwater wells in China is unsafe for human consumption [What levels and what substances make the water unsafe? - Mod.TG].The Changzhou school, with more than 2000 students, is adjacent to sites once occupied by Changlong, a chemical company that was previously fined by provincial regulators for environmental violations.CCTV's investigative segment quoted a whistleblower who said workers dumped or buried chemical waste and that many employees had contracted skin diseases themselves. One environmental assessment of soil at the site found levels of the toxic chemical chlorobenzene of nearly 95 000 times the national limit, while in another instance, testing was still ongoing as construction of the school began, resulting in ""in a classic case of 'build first, assess later,'"" CCTV said.In an apparent effort to pre-empt the report, the school published on its website late Friday [15 Apr 2016] the results of 2 environmental assessments in March 2016 showing that the campus met environmental standards. A statement on the Changzhou city government website also said separate tests conducted last month [March 2016] at the behest of the school and parents showed indoor air quality, soil and groundwater were all up to national standards.Of the school's 2451 students, all were in classes except for one on leave, 4 out sick, and 5 in the process of transferring to a different school. Of 210 teachers, all but 3 were in school, the statement said. ""We welcome supervision from the media and all walks of life. We will look into the relevant issues raised in the report ... and will make all information available to the public,"" the statement said.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Something seems slightly off in this article. The article mentions clinical signs in the children that seem more consistent with long term, high level exposure to one or more chemicals, perhaps by more than one route of exposure.This may highlight groundwater contamination. If the source of chemicals or heavy metals is ground water, then clearly ingestion would be the route. And a variety of chemicals and heavy metals in ground water could explain the clinical signs mentioned early in the article.More information regarding other pesticides and heavy metals is needed. But how are/were the children exposed? Aerosol? Ingestion? Contact? Ingestion of ground water seems the likely culprit, but more information is needed.Information on chlorobenzene is provided below, but that may not necessarily be the cause of the problem. The route of exposure is unclear as well. Clearly, this whole situation needs more investigation.Chlorobenzene is used primarily as a solvent, a degreasing agent, and a chemical intermediate. Limited information is available on the acute (short-term) effects of chlorobenzene. Acute inhalation exposure of animals to chlorobenzene produced narcosis, restlessness, tremors, and muscle spasms. Chronic (long-term) exposure of humans to chlorobenzene affects the central nervous system (CNS). Signs of neurotoxicity in humans include numbness, cyanosis, hyperesthesia (increased sensation), and muscle spasms. No information is available on the carcinogenic effects of chlorobenzene in humans.The primary uses of chlorobenzene are as a solvent for pesticide formulations, diisocyanate manufacture, and degreasing automobile parts and for the production of nitrochlorobenzene. In the past, chlorobenzene was used as an intermediate in phenol and DDT production.Human exposure to chlorobenzene appears to be primarily occupational. In urban areas, chlorobenzene may be released to the ambient air during its manufacture and use. Chlorobenzene or its breakdown products can be detected in urine, exhaled breath, blood, and body fat to determine whether or not exposure has occurred.Acute effects: - A child who ingested chlorobenzene became unconscious and cyanotic and had muscle spasms but recovered completely. (1)- Acute inhalation exposure of animals to chlorobenzene produced narcosis, restlessness, tremors, and muscle spasms. (1,2)- Acute animal tests in rats, mice, rabbits, and guinea pigs have demonstrated chlorobenzene to have low acute toxicity by inhalation and moderate acute toxicity from oral exposure. (1,3)Chronic effects (non-cancer): - Chronic exposure of humans to chlorobenzene affects the CNS. Signs of neurotoxicity include numbness, cyanosis, hyperesthesia (increased sensation), and muscle spasms. (1,4)- Headaches and irritation of the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract and eyes have also been reported in humans chronically exposed via inhalation. (4)- The CNS, liver, and kidneys have been affected in animals chronically exposed to chlorobenzene by inhalation. (1)- Chronic ingestion of chlorobenzene has resulted in damage to the kidneys and liver in animals. (1,4)- EPA has calculated a provisional Reference Concentration (RfC) of 0.02 milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m3) for chlorobenzene based on kidney and liver effects in rats. The RfC is an estimate (with uncertainty spanning perhaps an order of magnitude) of a continuous inhalation exposure to the human population (including sensitive subgroups), that is likely to be without appreciable risk of deleterious noncancer effects during a lifetime. It is not a direct esimator of risk but rather a reference point to gauge the potential effects. At exposures increasingly greater than the RfC, the potential for adverse health effects increases. Lifetime exposure above the RfC does not imply that an adverse health effect would necessarily occur. The provisional RfC is a value that has had some form of Agency review, but it does not appear on IRIS. (6)- The Reference Dose (RfD) for chlorobenzene is 0.02 milligrams per kilogram body weight per day (mg/kg/d) based on histopathologic changes in the liver in dogs. (5)- EPA has medium confidence in the study on which the RfD was based because it provided both a no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) and a lowest-observed-adverse-effect level (LOAEL) and incorporated several biochemical and biological endpoints; medium confidence in the database because several subchronic, chronic, developmental, and reproductive toxicity studies provide supportive data, but they did not give a complete assessment of toxicity; and, consequently, medium confidence in the RfD. (5)Reproductive/developmental effects:- No information is available on the reproductive or developmental effects of chlorobenzene in humans.- Chronic inhalation exposure of rats to chlorobenzene did not adversely affect reproductive performance or fertility. However, a slight increase in the incidence of degenerative testicular changes was observed. (1,4)- Chlorobenzene does not appear to be a developmental toxicant and did not produce structural malformations in rats and rabbits acutely exposed via inhalation. (1,4,5)Cancer risk:- No information is available on the carcinogenic effects of chlorobenzene in humans.- In a National Toxicology Program (NTP) study of rats and mice exposed to chlorobenzene via gavage (experimentally placing the chemical in the stomach), an increased incidence of neoplastic nodules of the liver in high dose male rats was observed, but not in female rats or male or female mice. (7)- EPA has classified chlorobenzene as a Group D, not classifiable as to human carcinogenicity. (5)Physical properties- The chemical formula for chlorobenzene is C6H5Cl, and its molecular weight is 112.56 g/mol. (1)- Chlorobenzene occurs as a colorless flammable liquid, with low solubility in water. (1,4)- Chlorobenzene has an aromatic, almond-like odor, with an odor threshold of 1 to 8 mg/m3. (1)- The vapor pressure for chlorobenzene is 8.8 mm Hg at 20 C, and its log octanol/water partition coefficient (log Kow) is 2.84. (1)References1. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). Toxicological profile for chlorobenzene. Public Health Service, US Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA. 1990.2. US Department of Health and Human Services. Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB, online database). National Toxicology Information Program, National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD. 1993.3. US Department of Health and Human Services. Registry of toxic effects of chemical substances (RTECS, online database). National Toxicology Information Program, National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD. 1993.4. US Environmental Protection Agency. Updated health effects assessment for chlorobenzene. EPA/600/8-89/099. Environmental Criteria and Assessment Office, Office of Health and Environmental Assessment, Office of Research and Development, Cincinnati, OH. 1989.5. US Environmental Protection Agency. Integrated risk information system (IRIS) on chlorobenzene. National Center for Environmental Assessment, Office of Research and Development, Washington, DC. 1999.6. US Environmental Protection Agency. Health effects assessment summary tables. FY 1997 Update. Solid Waste and Emergency Response, Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, Cincinnati, OH. EPA/540/R-97-036. 1997.7. National Toxicology Program. Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of chlorobenzene (CAS No. 108-90-7) in F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice (gavage studies). TR No. 261. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD. 1985.8. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). 1999 TLVs and BEIs. Threshold limit values for chemical substances and physical agents. Biological exposure indices. Cincinnati, OH. 1999.9. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). Occupational safety and health standards, toxic and hazardous substances. Code of Federal Regulations. 29 CFR 1910.1000. 1998.10. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). Pocket guide to chemical hazards. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cincinnati, OH. 1997.Portions of this comment were extracted from <https://www3.epa.gov/airtoxics/hlthef/chlorobe.html>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>.]
