WHO, Influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update -- 261 (based on data up to 3 Apr 2016)--------------------------------------------------------Summary-------In the Northern Hemisphere, influenza activity was decreasing, while still elevated in some areas, due in part to an increase of influenza B activity. In the Southern Hemisphere, influenza activity was reported to be slightly increasing.- In North America, decreasing but sustained influenza activity was reported with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus predominating.- In Europe in general, a decreasing trend of influenza activity was observed. In Northern Europe, overall influenza activity decreased but remained at moderate levels. A shift towards circulation of influenza B virus was detected in parts of Europe.- Northern Temperate Asia continued to report ongoing and elevated levels of influenza activity with increasing proportions of influenza B virus.- In Central America and the Caribbean, low influenza activity was reported in most countries except in Jamaica where elevated severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) activity associated with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection was reported.- In tropical South America, low but increasing circulation of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus was reported. In Brazil, influenza activity was above expected levels for this time of year, with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus predominating. Colombia reported high circulation of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).- In Temperate South America, influenza activity slightly increased but remained at low level. An increase in influenza-like illness (ILI) and SARI rates were reported in Argentina, Chile and Paraguay.- In Oceania and South Africa influenza virus activity remained low.- National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 92 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the period from 21 Mar 2016 to 3 Apr 2016 (data as of 2016-04-15 03:54:50 UTC). The WHO GISRS laboratories tested more than 101 187 specimens during that time. 24 302 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 13 251 (54.5 per cent) were typed as influenza A and 11 051 (45.5 per cent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 4895 (85.8 per cent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09, and 811 (14.2 per cent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 473 (19.6 per cent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 1936 (80.4 per cent) to the B-Victoria lineage.[The detailed influenza update can be accessed at the source URL above.]Source of data--------------The Global Influenza Programme monitors influenza activity worldwide and publishes an update every 2 weeks. The updates are based on available epidemiological and virological data sources, including FluNet (reported by the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System) and influenza reports from WHO Regional Offices and Member States. Completeness can vary among updates due to availability and quality of data available at the time when the update is developed.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Overall, influenza activity has decreased since the last update. The proportion of influenza B viruses detected since then has increased during the last few weeks, with the B-Victoria lineage largely predominant. Among influenza A viruses, influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses are the majority of the detected strains. - Mod.UBA]
