PLoS [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371%2Fjournal.pntd.0004637>Mapping the distribution of anthrax in mainland China, 2005-2013----------------------------------------------------------------Wan-Jun Chen, Sheng-Jie Lai, Yang Yang, Kun Liu, Xin-Lou Li, Hong-Wu Yao, et al.PLoS <http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004637>Abstract--------Background:Anthrax, a global re-emerging zoonotic disease in recent years is enzootic in mainland China. Despite its significance to the public health, spatiotemporal distributions of the disease in human and livestock and its potential driving factors remain poorly understood.Methodology/principal findings:Using the national surveillance data of human and livestock anthrax from 2005 to 2013, we conducted a retrospective epidemiological study and risk assessment of anthrax in mainland China. The potential determinants for the temporal and spatial distributions of human anthrax were also explored. We found that the majority of human anthrax cases were located in 6 provinces in western and north eastern China, and 5 clustering areas with higher incidences were identified. The disease mostly peaked in July or August, and males aged 30-49 years had higher incidence than other subgroups. Monthly incidence of human anthrax was positively correlated with monthly average temperature, relative humidity and monthly accumulative rainfall with lags of 0-2 months. A boosted regression trees (BRT) model at the county level reveals that densities of cattle, sheep and human, coverage of meadow, coverage of typical grassland, elevation, coverage of topsoil with pH greater than 6.1, concentration of organic carbon in topsoil, and the meteorological factors have contributed substantially to the spatial distribution of the disease. The model-predicted probability of occurrence of human cases in mainland China was mapped at the county level.Conclusions/significance:Anthrax in China was characterized by significant seasonality and spatial clustering. The spatial distribution of human anthrax was largely driven by livestock husbandry, human density, land cover, elevation, topsoil features and climate. Enhanced surveillance and intervention for livestock and human anthrax in the high-risk regions, particularly on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, is the key to the prevention of human infections.Author summary--------------Anthrax is a worldwide zoonosis affecting mostly grazing herbivores, with occasional spillover to humans who have contact with infected animals or contaminated animal products. We characterized the distributional patterns of both human and livestock anthrax in China from 2005 to 2013, and identified agro-ecological, environmental and meteorological factors contributing to the temporal and spatial distributions of the disease. We found that the spatial distribution of human anthrax in China was mainly driven by densities of cattle, sheep and humans, coverage of meadow, coverage of typical grassland, elevation, pH level of topsoil, concentration of organic carbon in topsoil, and meteorological factors. We also identified the regions with higher probabilities for the occurrence of human cases. Our findings provided a clear qualitative and quantitative understanding of the epidemiological characteristics and risk recognition of anthrax in China, and can be helpful for prioritizing surveillance and control programs in the future.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This is a very nice and complete overview of human and animal anthrax in mainland China. The strains in western China reflect interactions with the Silk Road. But for China itself they are of the Sterne-Ames group and logically were the result of Admiral He's 3 voyages to East Africa in 1417-19, 1421-22, and 1430-33. With such a very large fleet we can assume that the sailors visited the street markets and bought exotic hides for their relatives at home. Some will have been hides off anthrax carcasses. Admiral He preferred live exotic wildlife, having sent a young giraffe to his Emperor given to him during his 4th voyage in 1415. See: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zheng_He>. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>.]
