Tuko News, Kenya [edited]<https://tuko.co.ke/121178-yellow-fever-medical-personnel-turn-border-points-into-cash-cows.html>A directive [requiring evidence of yellow fever vaccination] has been put in place by Uganda's government following an outbreak of the disease in Angola and 2 cases of travelers from the country dying in Kenya. A directive by both the Kenyan and Ugandan governments that no one would cross the border without producing documentation of proof of having being vaccinated for yellow fever has created a cash cow at the border points. Public health officials at the Busia and Malaba borders [have been] accused of extorting bribes from passengers to allow them to cross over the border to either country. According to the Daily Nation, the officials were using brokers to extort KSh 5000 [about USD 50] from every passenger per bus in order to be cleared for travel if they did not have the certificates.Isaac Wanzala, one among hundreds of passengers, told the newspaper that after paying the bribe, the passengers were sneaked into the destination country as bus drivers are also forced to part with KSh 5000 to proceed with their journey. According to the Standard, most brokers directed travelers to use the porous border point along Sofia area without having received any vaccination. ""Those who pay are given special treatment when it comes to being given the medicine [yellow fever vaccine?] that is brought here. When it runs out of stock, we end up waiting for more than 12 hours only to not be cleared,"" said a passenger as quoted in the Standard.Some officials were also accused of issuing certificates without giving a person the vaccination which takes 10 days to take effect for a lifetime coverage while others allow passengers who produce expired certificates to proceed with their journey. Busia health executive Ambrose Fwamba said that as arrangements were being made to transport vaccines to the border town, those found to be demanding bribes and smuggling people would be arrested. ""The disease is very infectious and receiving the vaccines is very important. These people should only cross after 10 days since being vaccinated,"" said Fwamba.The border point control by medical personnel was an initial directive by Uganda's president Yoweri Museveni who said no Kenyan would enter his country without a yellow fever certificate or would risk being quarantined in a camp. This was as he falsely [Perhaps ""mistakenly"" would have been a better word. - Mod.SH] announced that there was a yellow fever outbreak in Kenya because 2 patients had died from the disease. The 2 had been from trips in Angola which is the point of origin of the disease that has so far affected more than 2000 people to date.The World Health Organization issued an alert to the continent and world that this Angolan outbreak posed a great health risk to the rest of the world.[byline: Winnie Mabel]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[A 21 Apr 2016 report indicates that hundreds of passengers were stranded at the border posts for lack of the certificates. Some were forced to return to Nairobi to pick up the documents following a directive by the Health Ministry that all travellers in and out of the country must possess the certificates. Business people heading to different foreign countries have incurred huge loses because they could not make it to their destinations (<http://allafrica.com/stories/201604220714.html>).Bribery and the issuing of false vaccination certificates reported above is a very serious situation and must be stopped at once. It poses a real menace to the public's health of the region and beyond. Although there appears to be no risk of importation of YF virus from viremic individuals into Uganda from Kenya, where no local transmission has been reported, one hopes that no similar bribery schemes are going on along the Uganda-DR Congo borders as well. - Mod.TYWhile it would normally be good public health practice to quarantine people for 10 days after vaccination waiting for it to take its full effect, according to WHO published guidelines, every day that vaccinated people have to wait at the border increases the risk that a yellow fever infected person will get there from the DR Congo or Rwanda border, and mosquitoes will spread it to the Kenya side. Then when they are released, travellers will spread it all over both countries, to Kampala and Nairobi first, and then Dar-es-Salaam and from those international airports to the world. There is a lower risk in letting them go as soon as possible. - Mod.JWA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the borders adjoining Uganda, Kenya, the DR Congo, Rwanda and Tanzania can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/174>.]
