WHO Global Alert and Response (GAR), Disease Outbreak News [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/22-april-2016-cholera-tanzania/en/>Cholera - United Republic of Tanzania-------------------------------------The National IHR Focal Point of the United Republic of Tanzania has provided WHO with an update on the ongoing outbreak of cholera. As of 20 Apr 2016, a total of 24 108 cases, including 378 deaths, had been reported nationwide. The majority of these cases had been reported from 23 regions in mainland Tanzania (20 961 cases, including 329 deaths).The overall trend of incident cases has been fluctuating. Between October and December 2015, there was a drastic reduction in the number of new cases reported in several regions (Morogoro, Dar es Salaam, Tanga, Arusha and Singida). From the middle of December 2015 to the end of March 2016, the number of new reported cases started to increase again. Then, since the middle of March 2016, there has been a significant reduction in cases reported in the mainland. For instance, the daily average of incident cases has declined from around 150 in March 2016 to less than 30 in the middle of April 2016.To date, Zanzibar has reported 3057 cases, including 51 deaths, from 5 regions. The majority of the cases are from Unguja Island (1818 cases, including 38 deaths) while Pemba Island has reported a cumulative total of 1239 cases, including 13 deaths.Assessments have shown that the main factors associated with the spread of the infection both in mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar are limited access to safe water and sanitation. Water supply institutions lack the capacity to chlorinate and conduct regular water quality monitoring and assessments. The coverage of improved latrines is also very low. Poor hygienic practices perpetuated by myths and misconceptions, and the lack of sanitation facilities in poor households have also been associated with the outbreak.Public health response----------------------A multisectoral National Cholera Task Force (comprising the Ministry of Health, WHO, UNICEF, the Centers for Disease Control -- CDC, the Red Cross Society and other partners) is providing oversight and coordination for the response to the outbreak. The National Health Sector Cholera Response Plan has been endorsed to guide the response. The task force, which is jointly led by the government and WHO, has 6 technical sub-committees: (1) water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH); (2) social mobilization; (3) surveillance; (4) laboratory; (5) case management; and, (6) logistics and administrative. The sub-committees meet on a daily basis to provide updates on the response and the situation in their respective areas of responsibility and closely liaise with the implementing districts. These cholera response coordination structures are replicated at regional and district levels.The health sector has focused on the following interventions: mobilizing communities to promote personal hygiene, safe water and good sanitation; distributing chlorine for household water treatment and safe storage; conducting routine water sampling and laboratory analysis for contamination; and strengthening of case management in treatment centers and risk management during burial of deceased cholera patients. Extended primary health care (PHC) committee meetings are held in different regions with participation of regional commissioners, district commissioners, other key stakeholders and other local leaders as well as health authorities and workers. Rapid response teams are being deployed to provide field level support to the most affected regions and districts for targeted control initiatives specific to the respective areas.WHO coordinates partners, provides technical guidance on surveillance and case management as well as water quality monitoring. The organization has so far mobilized over 25 international public health experts to support the government in various response activities (promotion of safe water, sanitation and hygiene, social mobilization, case management and monitoring, procurement of medicines and supplies, etc.). With WHO and CDC support, a public health emergency operation center (PHEOC) has been made functional to support the coordination of the response interventions. The country office is also supporting the construction of ventilated improved pit latrines and borehole hand pumps in selected hotspot villages.In November 2015, WHO graded the epidemic as a level 2 emergency on the Emergency Response Framework (ERF) grading scale -- the ERF grading scale has three levels. In February 2016, an incident manager was appointed and has been providing support to the response both on the ground and remotely. The regional office is providing additional experts for surveillance support at subnational level in the high-risk districts to ensure a sustainable impact.WHO risk assessment-------------------Although there has recently been an apparent significant decline in the number of reported new cholera cases, the risk of continued spread continues to exist in the country due to (i) the vast geographical distribution of cases, (ii) the persistence of underlying causative factors such as poor access to safe water and sanitation, (iii) sub-optimal surveillance and laboratory capacity in certain districts, (iv) geographical mobility of symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals. Furthermore, the El Nino phenomenon may have also played a part in perpetuating the outbreak. The potential for international spread of this outbreak beyond the borders of Tanzania exists given the high and free mobility between the country and the neighboring countries. Neighboring Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia have also been responding to cholera outbreaks. In addition, Tanzania harbors busy international seaports and airports which connect the country with many other unaffected countries. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.WHO advice----------WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restriction to the United Republic of Tanzania based on the current information available.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp<promed@promedmail.org>[A map of Tanzania can be found at :<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tanzania>. The country has borders with Zambia and Malawi to its south and Uganda to its north. - Mod.LL]*****[2] Cholera - Uganda (Namayingo District)Date: Sat 23 Apr 2016Source: AllAfrica, The Monitor report, [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201604251201.html>Prisons authorities in Namayingo have barred the public from visiting inmates at Buyinja Prison following an outbreak of cholera in the district.Speaking to Saturday Monitor on Thu 21 Apr 2016, the officer in charge of the prison, Mr Robert Aligawesa, said the measures came into force this week to avert the spread of cholera. ""It would be disastrous if cholera broke out in the prison. We have moved to avert such a scenario by banning visits until further notice,"" Mr Aligawesa said. He said they have also been sending all new prisoners to Buyinja Health Centre IV for mandatory cholera tests.According to health officials, the number of cholera-related deaths is at 4, while that of the infected has risen from 42 to 87 since the outbreak at the end of last month. The district health officer, Mr Michael Bwamiki Kitamirike, said the deceased were all residents of Mutumba Sub-county.Mr Kitamirike said the infected people have been admitted to an isolation ward at Masafu Hospital. He cited Bulundira, Mutumba, Busiro, Lugala and Banda as worst hit areas. Mr Kitamirike blamed the outbreak on poor hygiene and sanitation. ""Besides lack of sources of safe water, the pit-coverage in the area is very low and there is need for our local leaders to educate the community to dig up latrines,"" Mr Kitamirike said.[byline: Asuman Musobya]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Namayingo District is a district in Eastern Uganda and adjacent to Tanzania. - Mod.LL]*****[3] Cholera - Zambia (Southern Province)Date: Mon 25 Apr 2016Source: Lusaka Times [edited]<https://www.lusakatimes.com/2016/04/25/cholera-outbreak-spreads-mazabuka-district/>The outbreak of cholera which was only experienced on some Fishing camps of Mazabuka district has now spread to residential townships in the area.Mazabuka district medical officer Stephen Shanjalika says the disease has now spread to some parts of Mazabuka Township. He told Zanis [Zambia News and Information Services] in Mazabuka this morning that a cholera case has been recorded in Hillside, a residential area within the heart of Mazabuka. He said Mazabuka General Hospital this morning received a referral of a confirmed cholera case from Hillside Township.However, sources within the district have confirmed that Hillside area has had no water supply for the past 4 days due to a technical fault on Swasco [Southern Water and Sewerage Company] supply line.Cholera broke out in Mazabuka District 2 days ago [23 Apr 2016] on 5 fishing camps situated on the Lower Kafue River. A total of 2 deaths and now 36 confirmed cases have been admitted and confined in 2 cholera centres that have been established by health authorities in the district. According to Dr Shanjanika, the 36 cholera patients that are still undergoing treatment are out of danger.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Mazabuka District is a district of Zambia, located in Southern Province and can be found on a map at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mazabuka_District>. - Mod. LL]*****[4] Cholera - Malawi (Northern Region)Date: Mon 25 Apr 2016Source: Capital Radio Malawi [edited]<http://www.capitalradiomalawi.com/news/item/6116-cholera-cases-worry-authorities-in-malawi>Authorities in Malawi have expressed worry over the rise of cholera cases in the district of Karonga, some 555 km [about 345 mi] north of the capital, Lilongwe. Local leaders have urged members of the press to continue joining hands with them and health workers to disseminate information about the sporadic spread of the epidemic in the district to curb the challenge.Chief Kyungu made the call on 22 Apr 2016 during a cholera briefing update at Karonga museum's amphitheatre hall to strategize on the increase of the epidemic. It is said that in the morning of 22 Apr, Karonga district hospital had registered a total of 105 cholera cases with a death toll of 6 amid shortage of cholera kits.However, for the first time since the district started registering the outbreak last December 2015, the government has dispatched 2 lorry loads of cholera kits to the district hospital which the District Environmental Health Officer (DEHO) says will take his office a long way. Luwis Tukula said, ""Government has given us 2 lorry loads of cholera kits which I'm sure will bring much improvement, but I can't say the exact quantity of the items now since offloading is in progress.""Tukula confirmed the development to chiefs and journalists in the district before repeating that many cholera cases are being registered from communities situated along the shores of Lake Malawi. ""Most of these communities don't have pit latrines, a scenario that ignites the tendency of answering the call of nature in the lake or nearby bushes thereby increasing the multiplication of _Vibro cholera_, the bacterium that causes cholera.""[byline: Nobert Mzembe]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Karonga is a district in the Northern Region of Malawi and can be found on a map at: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karonga_District>. - Mod.LL[Prevention of cholera is primarily done with safe water/sanitation systems well demonstrated by the lack of cholera spread when introduced by travel into countries with clean water. Vaccination against cholera can also be useful. The use of a cholera vaccine during an ongoing outbreak was 1st demonstrated to be effective during an outbreak in the African country of Guinea in 2012 and reported in 2014:The publication with its citation is: Luquero FJ, Grout L, Ciglenecki, I, et al. Use of _Vibrio cholerae_ vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(22): 2111-20; available at <http://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJMoa1312680>.Background----------""The use of vaccines to prevent and control cholera is currently under debate. Shanchol is one of the 2 oral cholera vaccines prequalified by the World Health Organization; however, its effectiveness under field conditions and the protection it confers in the 1st months after administration remain unknown. The main objective of this study was to estimate the short-term effectiveness of 2 doses of Shanchol used as a part of the integrated response to a cholera outbreak in Africa.Methods-------We conducted a matched case-control study in Guinea between 20 May 2012 and 19 Oct 2012. Suspected cholera cases were confirmed by means of a rapid test, and controls were selected among neighbors of the same age and sex as the case patients. The odds of vaccination were compared between case patients and controls in bivariate and adjusted conditional logistic-regression models. Vaccine effectiveness was calculated as (1-odds ratio) X 100.Results-------Between 8 Jun 2012 and 19 Oct 2012, we enrolled 40 case patients and 160 controls in the study for the primary analysis. After adjustment for potentially confounding variables, vaccination with 2 complete doses was associated with significant protection against cholera (effectiveness, 86.6 per cent; 95 per cent confidence interval, 56.7 to 95.8; P=0.001).Conclusions-----------In this study, Shanchol was effective when used in response to a cholera outbreak in Guinea. This study provides evidence supporting the addition of vaccination as part of the response to an outbreak. It also supports the ongoing efforts to establish a cholera vaccine stockpile for emergency use, which would enhance outbreak prevention and control strategies.""Although these are small numbers, the investigators working in less than ideal conditions should be lauded for this study, which may be the ""straw that broke the camel's back"" regarding using a cholera vaccine during an ongoing outbreak of _V. cholerae_.The biologic used, Shanchol (produced in India), contains killed different biotypes of bacilli of both O1 and O139 serotypes. In a large study in Kolkata, India, a cluster-randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study revealed a cumulative efficacy of the product at 5 years of 65 per cent (95 per cent CI [confidence interval] 52-74), with significant protection at the P less than 0.0001 level (1). The other WHO prequalified vaccine, Dukoral, produced in Sweden, contained several biotypes of O1 only together with recombinant cholera toxin B subunit.As a review, the cholera toxin, encoded by the ctxA and ctxB genes, is the principal toxin produced by _V. cholerae_ O1 and O139 and is responsible for the disease. The genes are encoded with a filamentous bacteriophage. The toxin has many immunological properties that include impressive adjuvant properties and action as an anti-inflammatory agent. Each toxin molecule contains a catalytic A subunit (the active toxin) and 5 B subunits that bind the holotoxin to its ganglioside GM1 receptor. After internalization, a subunit of A, A1, will catalyze the ribosylation of a GTP-binding protein which increases the activation of adenyl cyclase and a chloride channel CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) which produces increased chloride secretion, intestinal water accumulation and diarrhea. It is mutations in CFTR that produces cystic fibrosis, a disease that affects a number of organs related to difficulties in fluid secretion (2).References----------1. Bhattacharya SK, Sur D, Ali M, et al. 5 year efficacy of a bivalent killed whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in Kolkata, India: a cluster-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2013;13(12):1050-6; available at <http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(13)70273-1/fulltext>.2. Lutwick LI, Preis J. Cholera. In: Tropical pediatrics: a public health concern of international proportions. New York: NovaBiomedical, 2014 (in press). - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12963>.]
