Stuff [edited]<http://www.stuff.co.nz/national/health/78861982/More-than-20-per-cent-of-whooping-cough-cases-in-Waikato>More than 20 per cent of whooping cough (pertussis) cases are occurring in the Waikato region, prompting doctors to urge parents to vaccinate their children against the preventable disease. New figures also show cases have doubled compared with this time in 2015, with specialists saying the country is due for another whooping cough outbreak.Starship Hospital paediatric specialists Dr Fiona Miles and Dr Anusha Ganeshalingham said outbreaks happen every 2 to 5 years. New Zealand's last outbreak of the disease was in 2011-2013. Ganeshalingham said the previous epidemic was the most serious recorded in the 25 year history of the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) at Starship Hospital. ""That outbreak was the worst our unit had seen since our unit was established in 1991. We had the same number of ICU admissions in that 2 year period as we had for the entire decade before that, and certainly the death rate was the worst it's ever been. We had 3 infant deaths, 2 were in our unit, and one was a little baby in another city, who was too sick for us to even retrieve.""The call for vaccinations is being heard across the spectrum, with Waikato District Health Board staff leading the way with flu vaccines. Board chair Bob Simcock said prevention is the only way to go. ""It's really important to me to stay healthy and get through the winter as well as I can because of the roles I have to play,"" Simcock said.[byline: Donna-Lee Biddle]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Most of the significant morbidity and mortality from pertussis is in infants less than 12 months of age, especially less than 6 months of age. Protecting this cohort is done by immunization of the mother in her last trimester and immunizing those who will be around the infant.Neonatal pertussis is observed to be especially severe, with as much as a 3 per cent risk of death. Symptoms can be substantially different with periods of apnea (breathing arrest), with seizures induced by hypoxia (low oxygen) usually the commonest manifestation of infection. The cough is present, but so weak that it may be unrecognized. In these children with so-called malignant pertussis, leukocytosis -- particularly with white blood cell (WBC) counts of 30 000 to 100 000 -- and severe pulmonary hypertension are ominous signs of mortality. In a study comparing neonatal pertussis to other neonatal respiratory infections, pertussis-positive neonates had longer hospital stays, less fever, more apnea and cyanosis spells, required more days of supplemental oxygen in the hospital, and accounted for most of the infants discharged on respiratory supportive care.A 2014 publication confirms the safety of maternal pertussis immunization: Kharbanda EO, Vazquez-Benitez G, Lipkind HS, et al. Evaluation of the association of maternal pertussis vaccination with obstetric events and birth outcomes. JAMA. 2014; 312(18):1897-904. Available at <http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1930817>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/164>.]
