Agence France Presse [edited]<http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/World/2016/Apr-25/349189-bottled-water-infects-over-4000-people-in-spain-with-norovirus.ashx>More than 4,000 people fell ill with norovirus in northeastern Spain after drinking bottled spring water contaminated with human fecal matter, local health officials said Monday, 25 Apr 2016. The health department of the regional government of Catalonia said 4146 people were treated for symptoms including nausea, vomiting, and fever in Barcelona and Tarragona after drinking the contaminated water from office water coolers. 6 needed hospital treatment.""It is the 1st time in the world that norovirus has been found in bottled water,"" said Albert Bosch, a microbiology professor at the University of Barcelona, who was in charge of the analysis of the contaminated water. ""The way this usually happens with tap water is because somehow fecal water gets mixed up with drinking water. But in this case we are talking of bottled water, there is a process and we don't know at what point it happened,"" he added.The Eden Springs bottled water company has recalled more than 6150 bottles of water that had been distributed in 925 companies in response to the outbreak, as a precaution. The company has said it bottled the contaminated water in Andorra, a tiny, mountainous principality nestled between Spain and France.Catalan health officials have declared the norovirus outbreak to be over since no new case has been detected in the past week [18 to 24 Apr 2016].Norovirus is rarely life-threatening but is highly contagious. It spreads from an infected person, from contaminated food or water, or by touching contaminated surfaces. Most people recover from its effects in 2 or 3 days.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Norovirus infections and outbreaks are usually more common in cooler, winter months. About half of all cases occur from December through February in countries above the equator and June through August in countries below the equator. However, in places closer to the equator, norovirus may be less seasonal. This may be because of temperature or the timing of the rainy season, but may also be associated with the birth rate. Worldwide, norovirus is the leading cause of gastroenteritis outbreaks. New norovirus strains emerge about every 2 to 4 years. Often, but not always, these new strains lead to an increase in outbreaks worldwide.  - Mod. LLA map of Catalonia can be seen at: <http://www.mapsofworld.com/spain/autonomous-community/cataluna/>. - CopyEd.AO]
