Wisconsin Department of Health Services [edited]<https://www.dhs.wisconsin.gov/disease/elizabethkingia.htm>The Wisconsin Department of Health Services (DHS), Division of Public Health (DPH) is currently investigating an outbreak of bacterial infections caused by _Elizabethkingia anopheles_. The majority of patients acquiring these infections are over 65 years old, and all patients have a history of at least one underlying serious illness.The Department quickly identified effective antibiotic treatment for _Elizabethkingia_, and has alerted health care providers, infection preventionists and laboratories statewide. Since the initial guidance was sent on 15 Jan 2016, there has been a rapid identification of cases, and healthcare providers have been able to treat and improve outcomes for patients. DHS continues to provide updates of outbreak-related information that includes laboratory testing, infection control and treatment guidance.At this time, the source of these infections is still unknown, and the Department continues to work diligently to control this outbreak. Disease detectives from the Department and the CDC are conducting a comprehensive investigation which includes:-Interviewing patients with _Elizabethkingia anopheles_ infection and/or their families to gather information about activities and exposures related to healthcare products, food, water, restaurants, and other community settings.-Obtaining environmental and product samples from facilities that have treated patients with _Elizabethkingia anopheles_ infections. To date, these samples have tested negative and there is no indication the bacteria were spread by a single healthcare facility.-Conducting a review of medical records.-Obtaining nose and throat swabs from individuals receiving care on the same units in health care facilities as a patient with a confirmed _Elizabethkingia anopheles_ to determine if they are carrying the bacteria. To date, all of these specimens tested negative, which suggests the bacteria are not spreading from person to person in healthcare settings.-Obtaining nose and throat swabs from household contacts of patients with confirmed cases to identify if there may have been exposure in their household environment.-Performing a ""social network"" analysis to examine any commonalities shared between patients including healthcare facilities or shared locations or activities in the community.Wisconsin 2016 _Elizabethkingia anophelis_ outbreak:Case counts between 1 Nov 2015 and 27 Apr 2016----------------------------------------------Confirmed = 59Under investigation = 2Possible cases = 4Total cases reported to Wisconsin DPH = 65Affected counties include Columbia, Dane, Dodge, Fond du Lac, Jefferson, Milwaukee, Ozaukee, Racine, Sheboygan, Washington, Waukesha and Winnebago.There have been 18 deaths among individuals with confirmed _Elizabethkingia anopheles_ infections and an additional 1 death among possible cases for a total of 19 deaths. It has not been determined if these deaths were caused by the infection or other serious pre-existing health problems. Counties where these deaths occurred are: Columbia, Dodge, Fond du lac, Milwaukee, Ozaukee, Racine, Sheboygan, Washington and Waukesha.This investigation is ongoing. Case counts may change as additional illnesses are identified and more cases are laboratory confirmed. The possible cases tested positive for _Elizabethkingia_ but will never be confirmed as the same strain of _Elizabethkingia anopheles_ because the outbreak specimens are no longer available to test.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] _E. anopheles_ BackgroundDate: Wed 27 Apr 2016Source: Slate [edited]<http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2016/04/elizabethkingia_bacteria_strain_could_cure_malaria_but_it_s_also_sickened.html>Back in 1948, Milton Berle had a TV show where he'd greet his audience with ""Good evening, ladies and germs!"" This was considered hysterically funny, and so absurd: Germs were thought to be bit players in the great drama of humanity, newly kept in line by antibiotics. But in the last 10 years, new ways of identifying bacteria genetically have turned the joke on its head. Technically, 60 percent of Berle's audience was germs, because it's now clear that a person consists of approximately 30 trillion cells of us and 40 trillion cells of ""them.""In a shift similar to when we realized that the sun did not revolve around the Earth, our place on the planet has turned inside out: We live in the germs' world, now. Increasingly, new diseases are textbook cases of how our old textbooks didn't describe our real relationship to microbes.Take _Elizabethkingia anophelis_, which has mysteriously sickened 61 people, mostly in Wisconsin, since last fall [2015]. All were already ill. 20 people have died, which is a very high rate. _Elizabethkingia anophelis_ is found in dirt, in mosquito guts, and pretty much everywhere else. The CDC has sent epidemiologists to Wisconsin, Illinois, and Michigan, and they've interviewed survivors, tested fellow patients, and even collected samples of skin care products used by those infected, without finding a clear mode of transmission or a thread connecting one infection to another. Exploring the history of what we do and don't know about _E. anophelis_ tells a story about the curious mix of hope and danger in our bacterial companions.The _Elizabethkingia_ bacterial genus was 1st discovered by Elizabeth O. King, a CDC microbiologist, in 1959. Using fluid from the spinal cords of children, many of whom had died of meningitis between 1948 to 1958, she isolated the likely cause under her microscope: bacteria with ""slender, slightly curved rods. Short, straight forms with rounded ends are also present."" She grew colonies of them on Petri dishes, where they appeared ""smooth, entire, glistening, gray-white and butyrous,"" which means butterfly-like. She found what they were capable of by subjecting them to chemical tests and antibiotics, and then injected them in rabbits, mice, and hamsters. Elizabeth King's original name for the genus referenced its yellowish color (_Flavobacterium_), and the name for its species referenced the infant meningitis it was associated with (meningosepticum). But in 2005, the genus was renamed _Elizabethkingia_ after her.Until 2008, _Elizabethkingia_ kept a pretty low profile. It was associated with the occasional case of meningitis, scattered in different countries, but otherwise not much thought was given to these rod-shaped bacteria. And then, Swedish malaria researcher Ingrid Faye identified another strain of _Elizabethkingia_ in the gut of a mosquito in Africa in 2008. Named after the mosquito [_Anopheles gambiae_], the bacteria was called _Elizabethkingia anophelis_.These days, microbiologists don't spend much time describing the shape of bacteria, or how they look in a Petri dish. Instead they sequence their genes, which is exactly what Jiannong Xu, an associate professor at New Mexico State University, did. By analyzing its genes in 2011, Xu and his team came to understand that _E. anophelis_ is a key player in the termite's gut, which made it a potential player in the fight against malaria. In fact, if you were a mosquito in the market for a gut-residing bacteria, you'd hire _E. anopheles_ straightaway! This strain of bacteria contains genes that help break down blood cells. And then, because digesting blood can lead to oxygen poisoning, _E. anopheles_ ingeniously makes antioxidants, too. But day to day, when the mosquito is just feeding on sugary nectar, the bacteria helps digest that. And finally, it has a large bag of tricks that make it resistant to antibiotics: a thick cell wall, special pumps that push toxins out of the cell, a set of genes that short-circuit many common antibiotics, a whole toolkit for avoiding death.I asked Xu why these bacteria have such powerful antibiotic capabilities. ""The mosquito's gut is a collection of bugs inside a bug: a world inside a world,"" he said. The gut bacteria have evolved to live together and kill harmful invaders. They've divided up the tasks: Some members of the community have strong antibiotic properties themselves, to slay the enemy, so the antibiotic resistance genes essentially protect the gut's traditional residents from their own weapons.Xu has spent the past 20 years studying how mosquitoes' immune systems work, which is much more than an academic question. When they take blood from humans, female mosquitoes take on malaria-causing parasites without damaging their own immune systems, incubate the parasites, and pass them back to humans. There has long been a hope that we could either encourage mosquitoes to breed less enthusiastically, kill the malaria parasites themselves, or engineer some other biological change that would lessen the threat of malaria. In any case, the benefits of understanding this immune process are large: Malaria kills 1.2 million people every year, and about half the world is vulnerable to catching it. Initially, it looked as if manipulating _E. anopheles_ might be a good way to keep malaria in check, and Xu got a grant to do just that.Once scientists knew how to identify _E. anopheles_, though, it started showing up in surprising places: in a sick newborn in Bangui, Central African Republic in 2011, then an intensive care unit in Singapore, and then in 2 babies in Hong Kong. Scientists determined that some cases were spread from mother to infant, but not by mosquitoes, despite its name and coziness with the insect. Meanwhile, since 2004, epidemiologists had noticed that cases of the original _Elizabethkingia meningoseptica_ seemed to be rising among babies and people with weak immune systems in hospital settings, where the bacteria's large set of genes for antibiotic resistance were a clear advantage.So who was the real _E. anopheles_? Had the bacteria suddenly changed to infect humans, or had it been the bad bug all along? When the CDC reanalyzed some past infections that had seemed like _meningoseptica_, they realized they were actually _anopheles_. ""It's difficult to draw conclusions about the history of _E. anophelis_ since it was just identified as a separate species in 2011,"" said John McQuiston, who is the team lead in the CDC's Special Bacteriology Reference Laboratory, via email. He added that there is no evidence that the infection is spread via mosquito bites.The story of _Elizabethkingia anopheles_ is typical of the paradox we're now in: Since 2008, we've doubled the genetic data we have about our world every 7 months. Genomic data is growing much faster than Moore's law -- which says that computer speeds double every 18 months -- and even more than our count of stars. It's gotten to the point where some biologists want to replace the phrase ""astronomical growth"" with ""genomic growth."" But more data open up more questions than they answer.And genes are just one part of the new information we have: The Internet brings us news of infections in places we never thought to look. Mosquitoes and diseases also are traveling farther and faster, by boat, by plane, as well as with a changing climate. (They could even be traveling by hand cream!) But understanding how these places are connected by these ubiquitous bacteria will take much longer.Amid this bounty of high-tech discovery, it's important to remember that new technology is not the answer to every problem. I asked New Mexico's Xu how his anti-malarial research was going. He said that _E. anopheles_ had proved hard to work with, though another team had made some progress. And he sounded a bit skeptical. ""It's relatively easy to engineer bacteria, but we don't know whether it would work in nature. We know what mosquitoes do in the lab, but we don't have an ecological sense of how they acquire bacteria, and we need that information."" In the meantime, it had become clear that there was a simpler solution to reducing malaria, mixing sugary mosquito bait with a toxic chemical seemed to kill mosquitoes more cheaply, and with fewer complications, than re-engineering their guts. ""In general, low-tech works better than high-tech,"" Xu said with a laugh.[Byline: Lisa Margonelli]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Two new cases are under investigation in Wisconsin. It is not known whether these are new cases or just cases finally coming to light from sometime in the past few months. No new Wisconsin counties appear to have been involved; all 12 affected counties are in the southeast corner of the state. No new cases have been reported from the outbreak strain of _E. anopheles_ from the adjacent states of Illinois and Michigan, which have reported one fatal case each.Surprisingly little more information is known:-The county locations of the newly suspected cases are not reported.-No information has come out regarding the time line of cases as to date of onset of illness and location.-No additional information has been released regarding the recently reported, but older, outbreak of a genetically different strain of _E. anopheles_ in Illinois. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Wisconsin USA can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/250>.]
