Daily Star Albany [edited]<http://www.albanydailystar.com/health/ebola-incubus-returned-liberia-after-disease-free-chicago-daily-science-11070.html>Ebola has returned to Liberia, one of 3 countries hit hardest by the worst Ebola outbreak in history. There have been more than 10 600 cases and over 4800 deaths, according to the World Health Organisation.Three members of a family in Liberia have contracted Ebola 2 months after the country was declared free of the virus, health officials said on Fri [23 Apr 2016].The 1st documented case in the family was a 10-year-old boy who started showing symptoms last week, said a Liberian health official, speaking on the condition of anonymity.After attending school on Mon [19 Apr 2016] and Tue [20 Apr 2016], the boy was admitted to a hospital and was transported to an Ebola treatment unit on Wed [21 Apr 2016], the official said.The boy's test came back positive on Thu [22 Apr 2016], as did subsequent tests for his father and a sibling, the official said, adding that at least 7 health care workers may have treated him without the protective equipment essential for Ebola cases.The World Health Organization declared Liberia free of Ebola on 9 May [2015], but a resurgence of the disease the next month sickened 4 people, 2 of whom died. The country was declared Ebola-free again on 3 Sep [2015].In Geneva, Dr. Bruce Aylward, the World Health Organization's special representative for the Ebola response and deputy director general for outbreaks and health emergencies, told officials that the new case had not dimmed hopes that West African countries might still be moving toward eliminating the original outbreak.The boy's case appears to point to the persistence of the virus among survivors, which can result in occasional resurgence of the disease, Dr. Aylward said, adding that flare-ups are expected to be less common and to end in 2016.In October [2015], Pauline Cafferkey, a British nurse who contracted Ebola while doing aid work in Sierra Leone and was thought to have recovered in January [2016], fell ill again due to a complication from the virus. She was recently released from the hospital and is believed to be in good health again. Ian Crozier, an American doctor also thought to have been cured of Ebola, revealed that he had had significant vision problems due to the virus in his eye.Since the spring of 2014, Liberia has suffered more than 10 600 cases and seen 4808 deaths. It was the 1st of 3 countries impacted most severely by the virus to be declared free of the virus in May [2015] and again in September [2015]. Sierra Leone passed that milestone on 7 Nov [2015]. Guinea recently began the 42-day countdown from when the last patient tested negative for a 2nd time.Dr. Aylward said the boy had no known contacts with a survivor or a history of travel that might have put him at risk. ""The investigation is ongoing,"" Dr. Aylward said. ""The country has moved extremely quickly.""He said the latest developments were the 7th time the W.H.O. suspected that a flare-up was related to the persistence of the virus in the population of survivors. For example, scientists have shown that the virus remains present for months in the semen of some men who recover from the disease, and could, in rare cases, be transmitted through unprotected sex.In all cases, however, transmission has been stopped quickly, with a low number of subsequent cases. New tools include an experimental vaccine that can be given to those who come into contact with patients.The new case highlighted the importance of maintaining strong surveillance programs. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said in a statement that it was working closely with the Liberian government and with international organizations. It noted that sporadic cases had been expected in Liberia, even though it had been declared free of Ebola.""Even though it has been nearly 4 months since the last Ebola patient was discharged from a Liberian Ebola treatment unit, Liberia has maintained a heightened state of vigilance,"" the C.D.C. said in the statement. ""Responders have proven to be effective in rapidly identifying, isolating and treating new cases. As the situation continues to evolve, C.D.C. and partners are working hard to rapidly control this case.""On Sun [24 Apr 2016], a committee appointed by the W.H.O.'s director general called for overhauls at the agency in the wake of the epidemic, including integrating emergency response and outbreak control functions, with oversight by an independent body. Three other panels, including one convened by Harvard and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and another by the National Academy of Medicine, are expected to release recommendations on preventing and controlling future pandemics in the coming weeks.Liberia was 1st declared Ebola-free on 9 May [2015], but new cases emerged in June 2015 resulting in 2 deaths. The WHO declared the country Ebola-free again on 3 Sep [2015].The new case is a 10-year-old boy who lives in the eastern Paynesville district of Monrovia, said Francis Kateh, chief medical officer and acting head of Liberia's Ebola Case Management System.Dr Kateh said the boy was being taken to a treatment centre outside Monrovia.""Yes, yes, you can say confirmed,"" he said when asked if the case had been confirmed to be Ebola. He added that officials were trying to find out how the boy contracted the disease. On Thu night [22 Apr 2016], before the new case was reported, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf delivered a speech praising ""the resilience"" of Liberians in overcoming Ebola.""Without the individual and collective support and co-operation of all our citizens and residents, it would have been difficult to defeat this scourge,"" Ms Sirleaf said.The new case in Liberia was announced days after Guinea, the country where the epidemic started, said it had no more Ebola cases and was beginning a 42-day countdown towards being declared free of Ebola transmission.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>
