CDC, Morbid Mortal Weekly Rep 2016;65:425-426 [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6516a5.htm?s_cid=mm6516a5_w>Notes from the Field: Health Care-Associated Hepatitis A Outbreak -- Texas, 2015--------------------------------------------------------------------------------On 27-28 Aug 2015, the Texas Department of State Health Services received calls from Fort Bend County and Harris County health departments requesting postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) recommendations for contacts of 2 nurses (patients A and B) with confirmed hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection. Both nurses had symptom onset during 15-19 Aug 2015 and worked for the same pediatric home health care agency in another jurisdiction. Because of the proximity of the onset dates, a common source exposure was suspected. The state and local health departments began an investigation to identify potentially exposed patients, their families, and other agency personnel; offer PEP; and identify the source of exposure.Interviews were conducted with the agency and patients A and B to identify their patients, the dates they visited each patient household, the services provided in the homes, and any other shared exposures. During their incubation and infectious periods (1-28 Aug 2015), patients A and B cared for a total of 12 children but had only 1 patient in common (a hepatitis A-vaccinated pediatric transplant recipient), and no other common exposures. Because the 2 nurses worked shifts of 10-12 hours in patients' homes using standard precautions, sharing bathrooms, and consuming food and beverages, all residents as well as all other nurses providing care in the homes were considered exposed.CDC recommends PEP, consisting of a single dose of monovalent hepatitis A (hepA) vaccine or immunoglobulin (IG, 0.02 mL/kg), within 2 weeks of exposure to HAV for previously unvaccinated persons (1). HepA vaccine is preferred for healthy persons aged 12 months-40 years. 2 of the 12 exposed children were not fully vaccinated: one was aged less than 1 year and was given IG, the other had previously received 1 dose of hepA vaccine and was given the 2nd dose. Among a total of 42 potentially exposed home health care nurses, 31 (74 percent) were not vaccinated against HAV. 2 unvaccinated nurses received hepA vaccine for PEP; the remaining unvaccinated agency nurses and household contacts were identified outside the recommended 2-week window for PEP. Patients, their household contacts, and agency nurses were monitored by the agency for symptoms consistent with HAV infection for the duration of the potential incubation period (50 days after their last date of contact with cases). No additional cases were reported.On 8 Sep 2015, the Texas Department of State Health Services sent serum specimens from patients A and B and their shared patient to CDC for HAV RNA detection and molecular sequencing. All 3 specimens had detectable HAV RNA with genetically identical sequences, thus confirming the child as infected with HAV (patient C). Further investigation revealed that a hospital nurse who had previously cared for patient C had also developed symptomatic HAV infection. The care for patient C provided by all 3 nurses included managing watery stool (e.g., changing diapers and ostomy bags). Thus, the epidemiologic and laboratory analyses provided evidence that all 3 nurses were infected through exposure to patient C. Further investigation to ascertain how patient C acquired HAV is under way.Hepatitis A is a highly contagious, self-limiting infection of the liver, spread through the fecal-oral route (2,3). Vaccination with a 2-dose series of hepA vaccine is recommended for children aged 12-23 months. In the USA, coverage with 2 doses of hepA vaccine is the lowest (58 percent) of all recommended childhood vaccines among children aged 19-35 months (58 percent) (4). Vaccination for adults aged greater than or equal to 19 years is recommended only for persons at high risk (2); coverage among adults aged greater than or equal to 19 years in 2013 was only 9 percent (3,5). Health care personnel are not considered at high risk for HAV infection because nosocomial hepatitis A infrequently occurs. Transmission to health care personnel usually occurs when the source patient has unrecognized hepatitis and is fecally incontinent or has diarrhea (6,7). Underdiagnosis might be especially prevalent in pediatric patients aged less than or equal to 5 years, who typically are asymptomatic (1), or in immunocompromised patients of any age. Although standard precautions are recommended for health care personnel working with diapered or incontinent patients without an infectious etiology for their symptoms, contact precautions are recommended when HAV or another infectious etiology is suspected or confirmed (8).References----------1. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Update: prevention of hepatitis A after exposure to hepatitis A virus and in international travelers. Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2007;56:1080-4.2. Hamborsky J, Kroger A, Wolfe S, editors. Epidemiology and prevention of vaccine-preventable diseases. 13th ed. Washington, DC: Public Health Foundation; 2015. <http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/index.html>3. Murphy TV, Denniston MM, Hill HA, et al: Progress toward eliminating hepatitis A disease in the United States. In: CDC. Strategies for reducing health disparities -- selected CDC-sponsored interventions, United States, 2016. MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 1).4. Hill HA, Elam-Evans LD, Yankey D, Singleton JA, Kolasa M: National, state, and selected local area vaccination coverage among children aged 19-35 months -- United States, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:889-96. 5. Williams WW, Lu PJ, O'Halloran A, et al: Vaccination coverage among adults, excluding influenza vaccination -- United States, 2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:95-102. 6. Chodick G, Ashkenazi S, Lerman Y: The risk of hepatitis A infection among healthcare workers: a review of reported outbreaks and sero-epidemiologic studies. J Hosp Infect 2006;62:414-20. 7. Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, et al: Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for infection control in healthcare personnel, 1998. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:407-63. 8. Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L: Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. 2007 guideline for isolation precautions: preventing transmission of infectious agents in healthcare settings. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2008. <http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/2007IP/2007isolationPrecautions.html>[Authors: Wiseman R, Weil LM, Lozano C, et al]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The following is a review of healthcare worker-associated hepatitis A infection:Chodick G, Ashkenazi S, Lerman Y: The risk of hepatitis A infection among healthcare workers: a review of reported outbreaks and sero-epidemiologic studies. J Hosp Infect. 2006;62:414-20.""Abstract---------All reports of hepatitis A (HA) outbreaks in healthcare settings published between 1975 and 2003 were studied to determine the background immunity or susceptibility of healthcare workers (HCWs) to HA. 26 reports were found. The number of infected personnel ranged from one to 66 and, in most outbreaks, nurses accounted for the majority of personnel infected, reflecting high attack rates reaching 15-41 percent. In addition, we found 23 sero-epidemiological studies for HA among HCWs that had been performed in 13 different countries. Seroprevalence rates of HCWs with anti-HA antibody ranged between 4 percent among paramedical workers in Germany to 88 percent among hospital maintenance workers in Portugal. Effective infection control of HA outbreaks in hospitals demands early recognition, including awareness of atypical presentations of the infection, and strict adherence to universal infection control measures. Education programmes are of special importance for HCWs in neonatal, paediatric and intensive care units. The findings of the current study suggest that a pre-employment screening policy and administration of active vaccination to susceptible HCWs, particularly nurses, should be seriously considered in high-risk settings."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/245>.]
