Goldendale Sentinel [edited]<http://www.goldendalesentinel.com/story/2016/04/27/news/hand-foot-and-mouth-disease-cases-reported/7410.html>The Klickitat County Health Department says it has received a handful of calls from schools saying some children in Goldendale [Washington state] have been diagnosed with hand, foot and mouth disease.The department has not issued a health alert on the outbreaks because the reports are unconfirmed. The disease is not required to be reported by physicians.Six calls were received from schools who say they took their children to doctors who diagnosed their children with hand, foot and mouth disease.The reports are troubling to some who have seen the diagnosed children being taken around town into businesses. According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the disease is readily spread by close personal contact, contact with contaminated surfaces and objects such as doorknobs, and even through the air from coughing and sneezing. Some businesses are concerned that affected children may spread the disease to customers.According to one report, a parent with an affected child was asked to leave a Goldendale store and told the disease was highly contagious.""What am I supposed to do?"" the parent is said to have responded. ""I need to go shopping, and I can't leave him at home.""The CDC says there is no vaccine to protect against the viruses that cause hand, foot and mouth disease. A person can lower their risk of being infected by:- Washing hands often with soap and water, especially after changing diapers and using the toilet.- Cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces and soiled items, including toys.- Avoiding close contact such as kissing, hugging, or sharing eating utensils or cups with people with hand, foot and mouth disease.If a person has mouth sores, it might be painful to swallow. However, it is important for people with hand, foot and mouth disease to drink enough liquids to prevent dehydration (loss of body fluids). If a person cannot swallow enough liquids, they may need to receive them through an IV in their vein.There is no specific treatment for the disease, the CDC states. However, some things can be done to relieve symptoms, such as:- Taking over-the-counter medications to relieve pain and fever (caution: aspirin should not be given to children).- Using mouthwashes or sprays that numb mouth pain.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Goldendale is a rural agricultural city and county seat of Klickitat County, Washington, United States.Hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) is a common human syndrome caused by highly contagious intestinal viruses. Hand, foot and mouth disease is caused by an enterovirus, most commonly coxsackievirus A16. However, other enteroviruses like coxsackievirus A10 or A6 have also been detected in outbreaks. Internationally, enterovirus 71 is another common etiologic agent.HFMD is highly contagious and is transmitted by nasopharyngeal secretions such as saliva or nasal mucus, by direct contact, or by fecal-oral transmission. The diagnosis usually is clinical and based on presenting signs and symptoms alone. If the diagnosis is unclear, a throat swab or stool specimen may be taken to identify the virus by culture. Treatment is mainly symptomatic and supportive.It is important to restrict contact of infected cases to prevent further spread as also indicated in the above report. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/52983>.]
