Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/florida-reports-3rd-creutzfeldt-jakob-disease-case-this-one-in-duval-county-45798/>Florida reports 3rd Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease case, this one in Duval County----------------------------------------------------------------------------Health officials in the Sunshine State [Florida] reported on the 3rd confirmed or probable Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) case of 2016 in Duval County. The confirmed case is from Jacksonville; no other information is available. In 2015, Duval County did not report any CJD cases.This follows recent reports of 2 CJD cases in Hillsborough County in January and March [2016].Statewide in 2015, 21 confirmed and 8 probable CJD cases were reported in the state from 20 counties.According to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Strokes (NINDS), CJD is a rare, degenerative, invariably fatal brain disorder. It affects about 1 person in every 1 million people per year worldwide; in the USA there are about 300 cases per year. CJD usually appears in later life and runs a rapid course. Typically, onset of symptoms occurs about age 60, and about 90 percent of individuals die within 1 year. In the early stages of disease, people may have failing memory, behavioral changes, lack of coordination and visual disturbances. As the illness progresses, mental deterioration becomes pronounced and involuntary movements, blindness, weakness of extremities, and coma may occur.There are 3 major categories of CJD:- In sporadic CJD, the disease appears even though the person has no known risk factors for the disease. This is by far the most common type of CJD and accounts for at least 85 percent of cases.- In hereditary CJD, the person has a family history of the disease and/or tests positive for a genetic mutation associated with CJD. About 5 to 10 percent of cases of CJD in the United States are hereditary.- In acquired CJD, the disease is transmitted by exposure to brain or nervous system tissue, usually through certain medical procedures. There is no evidence that CJD is contagious through casual contact with a CJD patient. Since CJD was 1st described in 1920, fewer than 1 percent of cases have been acquired CJD.CJD belongs to a family of human and animal diseases known as the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs). Spongiform refers to the characteristic appearance of infected brains, which become filled with holes until they resemble sponges under a microscope. CJD is the most common of the known human TSEs. Other human TSEs include kuru, fatal familial insomnia (FFI), and Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease (GSS). Kuru was identified in people of an isolated tribe in Papua New Guinea and has now almost disappeared. FFI and GSS are extremely rare hereditary diseases, found in just a few families around the world. Other TSEs are found in specific kinds of animals. These include bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), which is found in cows and is often referred to as ""mad cow"" disease; scrapie, which affects sheep and goats; mink encephalopathy; and feline encephalopathy. Similar diseases have occurred in elk, deer, and exotic zoo animals.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Based on 2014 numbers, the state of Florida had a population of about 20 million, so about 20 cases per year could be seen. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/212>.]
