Mlive [edited]<http://www.mlive.com/news/kalamazoo/index.ssf/2016/04/hold_unvaccinated_kids_kept_ou.html>Health and school officials are working hard to retrieve vaccination records of students as new cases of chickenpox continue to be reported in St. Joseph County [USA, Michigan] as of 22 Apr [2016], said Kim Wilhelm, Prevention Services Director for the tri-County health department, which serves Branch, Hillsdale and St. Joseph counties.Since 7 Mar [2016], when the outbreak began in Sturgis, children who have not been vaccinated against the varicella (chickenpox) virus or have proof that they have already had the disease have had to stay home from school for at least 21 days in those districts with sick children, Wilhelm said.In White Pigeon [MI], where officials are still going through records of all kids in all grades, right now 13 children who do not have chickenpox have been excluded from class in an effort to contain the spread of the disease.Of those, 6 students had waivers from parents who opted not to have their children vaccinated, and 12 were initially not up to date on their shots. Some of those have since been vaccinated and returned to school, she said. ""We have vaccinated 5 kids, and a few more are coming in for vaccinations,"" she said.Wilhelm said student numbers and involved school districts could change because of the fluid nature of the situation. Children who remain unvaccinated will be out of school through at least 11 May [2016]. Students can return to school immediately upon getting the shot, she said.She said that it is not sufficient for parents to say their children had chickenpox to be allowed to return to school. They must have a medical record of the diagnosis, or the children must have a blood test to verify that they have had the disease. This week, as of 27 Apr [2016], fewer than 10 children actually are out of school with chickenpox, she said.A possible outbreak in Mendon is being checked out as well, Wilhelm said.The chickenpox vaccine is 99 percent effective, and of the few vaccinated people who do get the disease, it is very mild, she said.Wilhelm said that the current outbreak has been confined to elementary age children.Children in need of an immunization can visit a local health department office in Coldwater, Hillsdale or Three Rivers, where walk-ins are welcomed, Wilhelm said.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Excerpted/edited from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:""Chickenpox is a very contagious disease caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV). The virus spreads easily from people with chickenpox to others who have never had the disease or been vaccinated. The virus spreads mainly by touching or breathing in the virus particles that come from chickenpox blisters, and possibly through tiny droplets from infected people that get into the air after they breathe or talk, for example.A person with chickenpox can spread the disease from 1-2 days before they get the rash until all their chickenpox blisters have formed scabs (usually 5-7 days). It takes about 2 weeks (from 10 to 21 days) after exposure to a person with chickenpox for someone to develop chickenpox. If a person vaccinated for chickenpox gets the disease, they can still spread it to others.VZV causes a blister-like rash, itching, tiredness, and fever. The rash appears first on the stomach, back and face and can spread over the entire body causing between 250 and 500 itchy blisters. Chickenpox can be serious, especially in babies, adults, and people with weakened immune systems. For most people, getting chickenpox once provides immunity for life. However, for a few people, they can get chickenpox more than once, although this is not common.The best way to prevent chickenpox is to get the chickenpox vaccine. Chickenpox vaccine is very safe and effective at preventing the disease. Most people who get the vaccine will not get chickenpox. If a vaccinated person does get chickenpox, it is usually mild, with fewer red spots or blisters and mild or no fever. The chickenpox vaccine prevents almost all cases of severe disease."" - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/225>.]
