Medical Xpress [edited]<http://medicalxpress.com/news/2016-04-gonorrhoea-cases-norway.html>Gonorrhea [figure 1 -- available at the source URL above]---------------------------------------------------------In Norway, the number of notified gonorrhoea cases is now the highest for 25 years. Reported cases of syphilis declined slightly but are still high compared to a few years ago, according to 2015 figures released by the Norwegian Institute of Public Health.In 2015, 851 gonorrhoea cases were reported, compared to 682 cases in 2014.The significant increase of gonorrhoea among men who have sex with men (MSM) began in 2010 and continued in 2015. Gonorrhoea among heterosexual men and women also continued to increase.Among the 851 cases, there were 690 men and 161 women. Of the men, 444 were infected homosexually, 243 were infected heterosexually, and the sexual orientations of 3 men were unknown. All the women were infected heterosexually.""The increase in gonorrhoea has been particularly strong among women, with a tripling of reported cases in a few years,"" says Ì÷ivind Nilsen, senior adviser at the Norwegian Institute of Public Health.The increase of gonorrhoea is seen especially in Oslo, but counties such as Buskerud, Hordaland, Nordland, Vest-Agder, and Vestfold have all seen a doubling or more of the number of gonorrhoea cases in 2015 compared with 2014. In Rogaland and Hordaland, which experienced a sharp increase in the number of cases in 2014, the number of cases remains high even though the reported cases fell slightly in Rogaland in 2015.""The increase in reported gonorrhoea cases seen in Norway in recent years may be due to a combination of more efficient diagnosis by increased use of PCR testing, plus a real increase in incidence"" continues Nilsen.Syphilis incidence remains high [figure 2 -- available at the source URL above]----------------------------------------------------------------------Syphilis cases among MSM remained high in 2015 but the number of cases decreased slightly among heterosexually-infected men and women. In 2015, the Norwegian Surveillance System for Communicable Diseases (MSIS) was notified about 172 cases of syphilis compared to 189 cases in 2014. Of the 2015 cases, 79 per cent (136 cases) were infected homosexually and 21 percent (36 cases) were infected heterosexually.""Even though the reported cases of syphilis fell slightly in 2015, the incidence is still significantly higher than what was common a few years ago,"" says Nilsen.The 172 cases reported in 2015 were distributed among 162 men and 10 women.One of the women reported being infected by another woman. Of the cases reported in 2015, 58 per cent were from Oslo. The number of cases in Hordaland among MSM increased sharply in 2014. In 2015, the number of cases returned to the average of recent years. Of the 172 cases of syphilis in 2015, 64 per cent were born in Norway.Early diagnosis, contact tracing and increased condom use---------------------------------------------------------The number of confirmed HIV cases among MSM declined in 2015. Nevertheless, the steadily increasing incidence of gonorrhoea in this group gives reason to believe that there still are a lot of unsafe sex practices. Sexually active MSM should be offered regular check-ups and treatment if necessary. In addition, the health service must be made aware that gonorrhoea and syphilis are now occurring more frequently among heterosexuals.""The Norwegian Institute of Public Health is concerned about the trend. Early diagnosis, prompt treatment, counselling, and contact tracing must be prioritised if we are to reverse this negative trend. Condom use must also increase to prevent the spread of infection,"" concludes Nilsen.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED-mail has posted many reports of the recent increased incidence of syphilis and gonococcal disease in many countries, mainly among men who have sex with men (MSM). This increased incidence in syphilis and gonococcal disease has been attributed to a variety of causes that promote unprotected sex among MSM, such as engaging in sex only with partners perceived to have the same HIV status as one's own to avoid using condoms (serosorting), and taking pre-exposure (PrEP) or post-exposure HIV prophylaxis. These factors would allow transmission of syphilis, gonorrhea, and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), without resulting in an increase in HIV infections, as is said to be occurring in Norway, where the number of confirmed HIV cases among MSM declined in 2015.Other factors that could account for the rising incidence of STDs include use of psychoactive ""party drugs"", multiple anonymous sex partners, use of Internet chat rooms to meet sex partners, and use of smartphone apps, such as Grindr and Tinder, that facilitate anonymous ""hookups"". Increased diagnostic testing could also contribute to the rising incidence of STDs. A discussion of the risk for acquisition of STDs associated with use of the Internet, mobile phones, and social networking sites can be found at <http://www.cdc.gov/std/life-stages-populations/Adolescents-white-paper.pdf>. - Mod.MLMaps of Norway can be seen at <http://www.questconnect.org/images/map_of_norway.png> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/107>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
