ABC News, ESPN report [edited]<http://abcnews.go.com/Sports/nfl-eating-meat-abroad-lead-positive-test/story?id=38852727>NFL [US National Football League] players are being warned about consuming meat produced in China and Mexico that potentially contains clenbuterol, which is banned under the league's performance-enhancing substance policy.The drug-testing program's independent administrator sent a memo to players, saying ""consuming large quantities of meat while visiting those particular countries may result in a positive test.""Clenbuterol is a muscle-building and weight-loss stimulant.""Players are warned to be aware of this issue when traveling to Mexico and China,"" the memo read. ""Please take caution if you decide to consume meat, and understand that you do so at your own risk."" The drug-testing program again advised: ""Players are responsible for what is in their bodies.""The Oakland Raiders will face the Houston Texans on Monday Night Football on [21 Nov 2016] in Mexico City as part of the league's international series. The Raiders also hosted a fan fest as part of the NFL draft this past [Sat 30 Apr 2016] in Mexico City.[A Texans player] actually tested positive for clenbuterol last season [2015] after a bye-week [a bye-week is a week where there are no games for that team - Mod.TG] trip to Mexico during which he ate Mexican beef, sources told ESPN.After a months-long process, [the player] was finally cleared in April [2016], sources said, allowing him to avoid what would have been a 10-game suspension. His case offers a warning for other players.Several players, took to Twitter after the memo was sent out.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Clenbuterol is a sympathomimetic amine that has a number of different activities. It has smooth muscle relaxing properties, which means it can relax bronchioles and be effective in the treatment of asthma and asthma-like conditions. Clenbuterol is sold as a clenbuterol hydrochloride for treatment of asthma and other restrictive respiratory conditions.Clenbuterol is a beta-2 agonist. This drug directs the body to make lean muscle instead of fat. It has been used by body builders and various athletes in an attempt to gain a competitive advantage. It has also been used in cattle, pork, sheep, and goats to gain a competitive advantage in livestock shows as they appear more muscled.Over the last several Olympic competitions various athletes have tested positive for clenbuterol and have been suspended by the various athletic committees and competition organizations. A few athletes have challenged the level found in the urine, because of extremely low levels. Such a level may indicate that it was in the food they consumed.Clenbuterol has a very long half-life and can be found in various locations in the body of animals or humans long (months) after consumption. Clenbuterol residues can affect lung and heart function in persons who have eaten liver or meat of animals given the drug. In the United States, no human illnesses have been associated with clenbuterol use in food animals. But, several outbreaks of reversible, short-term illnesses in Europe have been traced to ingesting clenbuterol residues in European beef liver.No deaths were reported in several European incidents involving the consumption of liver with clenbuterol residues. Spain reported 2 outbreaks of illness in 1990 totaling 135 persons who consumed contaminated beef liver. Samples had clenbuterol concentrations of 160 to 291 parts per billion. The people were hospitalized with reversible symptoms of increased heart rate, muscular tremors, headache, nausea, fever, and chills.Clenbuterol was suspected, but not confirmed, as the cause of an earlier outbreak of illness, also in Spain. A similar incident with 22 cases, also traced to beef liver, was reported from France. Clenbuterol was also a concern in Ireland in 1991.Although the toxic effects of clenbuterol residues have been described as mild, FDA (US Food and Drug Administration) considers all unintended effects on humans to be unacceptable. FDA said it is possible that persons being treated with adrenergic agents or who are otherwise sensitive to these drugs, may be far more severely affected by residues of clenbuterol than are normal, healthy individuals.The FDA is also concerned that the illicit use of clenbuterol could lead to illness or death in persons handling the drug. FDA said it is possible that clenbuterol effects on the cardiovascular system may be more hazardous via occupational inhalation exposure than via ingestion in food. But FDA said it has not been able to confirm reports of such reactions.While some of this has relatively historical sound to it, the drug is very much in use, illegally in the animal performance shows. It is, by evidence in athletic arenas, a problem among some human athletes. Sadly, many of these human competitors do not realize that they could suffer heart disease that may not be reversible.Portions of this comment have been extracted from <http://www.fsis.usda.gov/oa/background/clenbute.htm>.Please note there have been at least 3 reported episodes of clenbuterol contaminated meat in Mexico over the last 5 years -- see ProMED archives below. There was an additional one in 2008 that was not picked up by ProMED. - Mod.TG]
