BioRxiv [edited]<http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/04/25/050112>Lauren M Paul, Eric R Carlin, Meagan M Jenkins, Amanda L Tan, Carolyn M Barcellona, Cindo O Nicholson, Lydie Trautmann, Scott F Michael, Sharon Isern. Dengue Virus Antibodies Enhance Zika Virus Infection. AbstractBackground For decades, human infections with Zika virus (ZIKV), a mosquito-transmitted flavivirus, were sporadic, associated with mild disease, and went underreported since symptoms were similar to other acute febrile diseases endemic in the same regions. Recent reports of severe disease associated with ZIKV, including Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome and severe fetal abnormalities, have greatly heightened awareness. Given its recent history of rapid spread in immune naive populations, it is anticipated that ZIKV will continue to spread in the Americas and globally in regions where competent _Aedes_ mosquito vectors are found. Globally, dengue virus (DENV) is the most common mosquito-transmitted human flavivirus and is both well-established and the source of outbreaks in areas of recent ZIKV introduction. DENV and ZIKV are closely related, resulting in substantial antigenic overlap. Through a mechanism known as antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), anti-DENV antibodies can enhance the infectivity of DENV for certain classes of immune cells, causing increased viral production that correlates with severe disease outcomes. Similarly, ZIKV has been shown to undergo ADE in response to antibodies generated by other flaviviruses. However, response to DENV antibodies has not yet been investigated.Methodology / Principal Findings We tested the neutralizing and enhancing potential of well-characterized broadly neutralizing human anti-DENV monoclonal antibodies (HMAbs) and human DENV immune sera against ZIKV using neutralization and ADE assays. We show that anti-DENV HMAbs, cross-react, do not neutralize, and greatly enhance ZIKV infection in vitro. DENV immune sera had varying degrees of neutralization against ZIKV and similarly enhanced ZIKV infection. Conclusions / Significance Our results suggest that pre-existing DENV immunity will enhance ZIKV infection in vivo and may increase disease severity. A clear understanding of the interplay between ZIKV and DENV will be critical in informing public health responses in regions where these viruses co-circulate and will be particularly valuable for ZIKV and DENV vaccine design and implementation strategies.--Communicated by:Sharon Isern, Ph.D.ProfessorDepartment of Biological SciencesCollege of Arts and SciencesFlorida Gulf Coast UniversitySeidler Hall 30410501 FGCU Boulevard SouthFort Myers, FL 33965<sisern@fgcu.edu>[Occurrence of ADE with dengue antibody enhancing Zika virus infection is not good news. Dengue virus is widespread in the Americas, and Brazil, the main country affected by Zika virus infections, has over one million dengue cases annually. This observation raises a series of questions, including the role, if any, of dengue ADE in Zika virus infections of pregnant women with resulting fetal abnormalities. Professor Isern is thanked for sending in this report. - Mod.TY]******[3] ImmunopathogenesisDate: Wed 27 Apr 2016Source: Journal of Molecular Biology [edited]<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283616300833>David Olagnier, Donatella Amatore, Luciano Castiello, Matteo Ferrari, Enrico Palermo, Michael S. Diamond, Anna Teresa Palamara, John Hiscott. Dengue virus immunopathogenesis: lessons applicable to the emergence of Zika virus. AbstractDengue is the leading mosquito-transmitted viral infection in the world. There are more than 390 million new infections annually; while the majority of infected individuals are asymptomatic or develop a self-limited dengue fever, up to 1 million clinical cases develop severe manifestations, including dengue hemorrhagic fever and shock syndrome, resulting in ca. 25 000 deaths annually, mainly in children. Gaps in our understanding of the mechanisms that contribute to dengue infection and immunopathogenesis have hampered the development of vaccines and antiviral agents. Some of these limitations are highlighted by the explosive re-emergence of another arthropod-borne flavivirus -- Zika virus -- spread by the same vector, the _Aedes aegypti_ mosquito, that also carries dengue, yellow fever and chikungunya viruses. This review will discuss the early virus-host interactions in dengue infection, with emphasis on the interrelationship between oxidative stress and innate immune pathways, and will provide insight as to how lessons learned from dengue research may expedite therapeutic strategies for Zika virus.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[As studies delve into molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis of dengue and Zika viruses, it is going to be interesting to see how many of these mechanisms are common to both viruses and how many are different. - Mod.TY]******[4] Time lag - infection to Guillain-Barr̩ synrome and microcephalyDate: August 2016Source: Emerging Infectious Diseases [edited]<http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2208.160496>Paploski IAD, Prates APPB, Cardoso CW, Kikuti M, Silva MMO, Waller LA, et al. Time lags between exanthematous illness attributed to Zika virus, Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome, and microcephaly, Salvador, Brazil.AbstractZika virus infection emerged as a public health emergency after increasing evidence for its association with neurologic disorders and congenital malformations. In Salvador, Brazil, outbreaks of acute exanthematous illness (AEI) attributed to Zika virus, Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome (GBS), and microcephaly occurred in 2015. We investigated temporal correlations and time lags between these outbreaks to identify a common link between them by using epidemic curves and time series cross-correlations. Number of GBS cases peaked after a lag of 5-9 weeks from the AEI peak. Number of suspected cases of microcephaly peaked after a lag of 30-33 weeks from the AEI peak, which corresponded to time of potential infections of pregnant mothers during the 1st trimester. These findings support the association of GBS and microcephaly with Zika virus infection and provide evidence for a temporal relationship between timing of arboviral infection of pregnant women during the 1st trimester and birth outcome.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides some awareness for clinicians treating GBS patients or pregnant women previously exposed to Zika virus. These observations provide additional evidence of Zika virus as a cause of some cases of GBS and microcephaly. - Mod.TY]******[5] Virus evolutionDate: Tue 26 Apr 2016Source: Virologica Sinica 31 (2):118-130 [edited]<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12250-016-3774-9>Shu Shen, Junming Shi, Jun Wang, Shuang Tang, Hualin Wang, Zhihong Hu, Fei Deng. Phylogenetic analysis revealed the central roles of 2 African countries in the evolution and worldwide spread of Zika virus.AbstractRecent outbreaks of Zika virus (ZIKV) infections in Oceania's islands and the Americas were characterized by high numbers of cases and the spread of the virus to new areas. To better understand the origin of ZIKV, its epidemic history was reviewed. Although the available records and information are limited, 2 major genetic lineages of ZIKV were identified in previous studies. However, in this study, 3 lineages were identified based on a phylogenetic analysis of all virus sequences from GenBank, including those of the envelope protein (E) and non-structural protein 5 (NS5) coding regions. The spatial and temporal distributions of the 3 identified ZIKV lineages and the recombination events and mechanisms underlying their divergence and evolution were further elaborated. The potential migration pathway of ZIKV was also characterized. Our findings revealed the central roles of 2 African countries, Senegal and Cote d'Ivoire, in ZIKV evolution and genotypic divergence. Furthermore, our results suggested that the outbreaks in Asia and the Pacific islands originated from Africa. The results provide insights into the geographic origins of ZIKV outbreaks and the spread of the virus, and also contribute to a better understanding of ZIKV evolution, which is important for the prevention and control of ZIKV infections.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[One hopes that an extensive Zika virus repository of isolates is being assembled in every affected country so that differences in genome composition can be measured over time and related to observed disease and to vector mosquito-virus relationships. - Mod.TY]
