Voice of America [edited]<http://www.voanews.com/content/kenyan-police-foiled-anthrax-attack-linked-to-is-group/3315042.html>Kenyan police say they have foiled a terrorist plot by a group believed to have links to so-called Islamic State [IS]. The group was allegedly planning ""large-scale"" attacks intended to kill innocent Kenyans. Suspects include medical experts who police say were planning to launch an attack using the biological agent anthrax.Kenyan police have arrested medical intern Mohammed Abdi Ali, his wife, and her friend for their alleged involvement in an East African terror network. Police say other accomplices, including 2 medical interns, are on the run.""I believe that we have upped our game, in terms of collection of intelligence,"" said George Musamali, a security analyst for East and Central Africa. ""Because this was a very, very big breakthrough on the part of the intelligence agencies in Kenya, and this includes the national intelligence services, the Kenya police and also, people from the military intelligence. It shows that right now, the intelligence units are working together and they are well-coordinated.""Plans for bio-terror attack---------------------------Police say the foiled plot included plans for a biological terror attack using anthrax, an infectious bacterium that spreads rapidly once spores get into the body. They say the attack, planned for 29 Apr [2016], was to be on a similar scale to the Westgate Mall assault of September 2013, in which 67 people were killed. That attack was carried out by the Somalia-based al-Qaida-linked group, al-Shabab.Police released the names and photos of all 5 suspects on Twitter. They say the group was radicalizing and recruiting university students and other Kenyan youth, even encouraging them to join terror groups in Libya and Syria.Concerned about IS movements----------------------------And the alleged involvement of so-called Islamic State with this group is a concern, according to Musamali. ""Clearly, it shows that IS now wants to be a part of the play in East and Central Africa. And I think that this is something that should worry us, very much,"" he said.Warning that the 2 suspects at-large are armed and dangerous, Kenyan police are offering 2 million Kenyan shillings, almost $20,000, for information leading to their arrest.[Byline: Jill Craig]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Wed 4 May 2016Source: NBC News [edited]<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/kenya-police-say-they-foiled-isis-linked-plot-unleash-anthrax-n567721>An ISIS-linked terror group was planning to carry out ""large-scale attacks"" in Kenya comparable to the 2013 Westgate Mall siege that left dozens of people dead, local police said Wednesday. Kenya's National Police Service said it had foiled a plot due to unfold last Fri [29 Apr 2016] that involved medical experts with plans to ""unleash a biological attack in Kenya using anthrax.""A medical intern named Mohammed Abdi Ali was arrested under the country's terror laws in connection with the alleged plan, police added in a statement. Ali, who was interning at a hospital in the south of the country, is accused of radicalizing and recruiting university students and other young people into ""terrorism networks,"" the statement said.Police added that Ali's wife, Nuseiba Mohammed Haji -- a student at Uganda's Kampala International University -- and her alleged ""accomplice"" Fatuma Mohammed Hanshi also were arrested in Uganda. The statement did not provide further details on their alleged involvement in any plot. The arrests represented a ""major breakthrough in the fight against terrorism in Kenya and the region,"" according to the police statement. It said that since Ali's arrest, ""his accomplices in the terror network in Kenya have gone into hiding to evade justice,"" naming 2 other suspects in Kenya as medical interns Ahmed Hish and Farah Dagane. ""The suspects were planning large-scale attacks akin to the Westgate Mall attack, with the intention of killing innocent Kenyans,"" police said. ""[Ali's] network also included medical experts with whom they planned to unleash a biological attack in Kenya using anthrax.""Officials did not name the organization believed to be behind the alleged plot, referring to it only as an ""East African terror group"" with links to ISIS and neighboring Somalia that had been helping Kenyan youths leave the country and join militants in Libya and Syria. The most well-known Islamist group in the region is the Somalia-based al Shabab, which has claimed numerous attacks on civilians, including a college attack in April 2015 that left at least 147 people dead, as well as the deadly Westgate siege itself.[Byline: Alexander Smith]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There are other news reports but they are all working off the same news release with minor variations in the wording. So far the nature of this ""attack"" is unclear and thus the degree of public risk that would have been involved. There are no statements as to the recovery of any spores or spore preparations. Reading between the lines the authorities had tapped into Mohammed Abdi Ali's communications and intentions and thereby identified his coconspirators in Kenya and Uganda. While there has been significant concern since 2001 of another anthrax attack this is the first public announcement of such in the intervening 15 years. Time will tell how real the risk of an attack was and how the necessary cultures were obtained.Livestock & wildlife anthrax is enzootic, mainly in the Central, Eastern Nairobi & Rift Valley Provinces, but until recently very erratically reported. There were some 134 human cases in 2014. In one exposure in Embu district from eating an affected hippopotamus some 2000 received oral antibiotics though only 41 actual hospitalized cases were reported; see Anthrax - Kenya (04): (EB) human, wildlife 20140603.2516511. An unfortunate potential aspect of this 2016 event is that its publicity may encourage others with similar terrorist intents. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/174>.]
