Channel News Asia [edited]<http://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/singapore/weekly-cases-of-hand-foot/2751664.html>Weekly cases of hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) are at their highest since October 2013, according to data published by the [Singapore] Ministry of Health (MOH) on its website. There were 1052 HFMD cases from 17 Apr to 23 Apr this year [2016], which is the highest number since mid-October 2013, when 1247 weekly cases were reported, according to MOH figures.The numbers started increasing in February this year [2016]: there were 587 cases reported from 7 Feb to 13 Feb, rising to 756, 2 weeks later. The number of cases rose above the 900-mark in early March, before hitting the current high late last month [April 2016]. As of 23 Apr, 12 166 cases in total have been reported to MOH so far this year. In contrast, 8835 cases were reported between January and 25 Apr last year [2015].Infectious disease expert Leong Hoe Nam of Mount Elizabeth Novena Hospital said the upward trend will likely continue in the next 2-3 weeks, and it could become an epidemic. ""The number that exceeds 1000 is very significant: it tells us that many people have not been exposed to (the virus). We have a fresh group of people getting exposed to it and in turn this 1000 will spread easily to another 1000 to 2000 people,"" said Dr Leong. ""I think this is going to be an epidemic; if not we are already at the threshold of a new epidemic,"" Dr Leong added, while pointing out that the current strain is not life-threatening.HFMD can be transmitted from person to person by direct contact with bodily fluids such as saliva. While both adults and children can get HFMD, children below the age of 5 are more susceptible.As more cases have been reported, childcare centers have been working to deal with the problem. At Tai Pei childcare centre, a total of 14 HFMD cases had been reported since 2 Mar [2016] with about half of them affecting children below 3 years of age. The centre stepped up hygiene standards, and has been clear of HFMD since 15 Apr [2016]. ""To stop the chain of transmission, sterilization is very important. We even have to sterilize stationery. Usually, we only sterilized the common areas. Children's belongings like toys are sterilized once they've been played with. Everything that they touch, even charts and the walls along the corridor are all sterilized,"" said the school's principal, Drolma Teh. ""We also take children's temperatures and conduct health checks up to 3 times a day,"" Ms Teh added. Before the outbreak, children temperatures were taken twice daily.Four childcare centers on MOH's watch list------------------------------------------Childcare centers with more than 10 HFMD cases or with more than 13 percent of the enrolment contracting the virus and a transmission period of more than 16 days are put on a watch list on the MOH website. A total of 4 childcare centers are currently on the list: PCF Sparkletots Preschool at Sembawang, PCF Sparkletots Preschool at Paya Lebar, The Little Skool-House at Kent Vale and MY World at Woodlands Circle.In a statement to Channel NewsAsia, the PAP Community Foundation (PCF) said: ""Several cases have been reported in the outbreak of HFMD at PCF at Sembawang and PCF at Paya Lebar centers."" The PCF added that most of the children have recovered and no new cases have been reported at PCF at Sembawang and PCF at Paya Lebar centers since 26 Apr and 20 Apr [2016], respectively.""During outbreaks of infectious diseases, our centers would immediately increase the frequency of such precautionary measures and activate additional steps such as suspending large group activities to minimize contact between children, and where necessary, engage professional cleaners to disinfect the premises.""A spokesperson from Little Skool-House International, which manages Little Skool-House at Kent Vale, said it takes all necessary precautionary measures to detect and prevent the spread of HFMD. ""This includes conducting health checks every morning before a child enters school, and subsequent checks done when needed through the day. There are regular washing and sanitization of classrooms, children's cutlery and toys."" ""Should there be a confirmed case, the class affected will be isolated and communal activities such as morning assembly will cease,"" the spokesperson added. A parent [...] said ""the school should take precautionary measures and ensure the premises are clean.""MOH has been approached for comments on the current situation.[Byline: Lim Jia Qi]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[In the past decade, HFMD has become more predominant in the Asia-Pacific region and has become a pressing problem for global public health. After a large outbreak in 2008, the incidence of HFMD in Singapore has varied from 346.4/100 000 in 2009 to 698.8/100 000 in 2012. Coxsakievirus A16 (CVA16) and coxsakievirus A6 (CVA6) were predominant in HFMD cases. Moreover, about half of the cases were co-infected with 2 or 3 pathogens.HFMD usually attacks children under the age of 5, causing mild symptoms including fever, rash, vesiculation [blistering], and inappetence, but some symptoms are extremely severe and are accompanied by several neurological complications such as encephalitis, encephalomeningitis and neurogenic pneumonedema; circulatory disturbance; and can even lead to death.Human enteroviruses (new enterovirus, coxsakievirus and echovirus) are the most common pathogenic agents of HFMD. The major and most important causative agents are enterovirus 71 (EV71) and coxsakievirus A16 (CVA16), since their infections can result in severe consequences, especially EV71, which can result in the most severe consequences. Specimens initially considered to be infected with CVA16 were found to be co-infected with CVA16 and EV71 after inspection.Although HFMD is classically a mild disease, large outbreaks in the Asia-Pacific region have been described since 1997, with a high incidence of fatal cardiopulmonary and neurological complications, particularly when the causative virus is EV-71.The development of HFMD vaccines has rapidly expanded and pre-clinical studies are already finished and several clinical phases even completed, there are still no available vaccines and effective anti-virus therapies for HFMD.(Excerpted/edited from Z-C Zhuang, et al., Viruses. 2015 Dec; 7(12): 6400-6411. <http://www.mdpi.com/1999-4915/7/12/2947>.) - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/150>.]
