Fox26 KMPH News [edited]<http://kmph-kfre.com/news/local/hand-foot-and-mouth-disease-cases-spread-across-central-valley>Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease cases up across Central Valley-----------------------------------------------------------Cases of a contagious virus are on the rise across the Central Valley [California] -- and schools are taking extra measures to protect students from hand, foot and mouth disease.""It's tough to see your kids sick,"" said [a parent] as she picked up her kids from Wilson Elementary School in Sanger on Monday [2 May 2016]. She has a 1st grader and a kindergartner at the school. She also has a younger child, still in diapers. While she does what she can to keep them safe, keeping them healthy is a bigger challenge. ""I make them jump in the shower as soon as they get home from school. I know they're carrying a lot of germs,"" she says. But even those precautions weren't enough to keep her kids from getting hand, foot and mouth disease 3 weeks ago.Monday [2 May 2016], another parent at Wilson tells Fox26 KMPH News her child was diagnosed. He is a preschooler at the school -- and the 18th child to get sick at 7 different sites across the district.Numbers were requested from Fresno and Clovis Unified School Districts, but were not received as of the time of our report. ""We started with 2 isolated cases in one classroom a couple of weeks ago,"" says Kimberly Salomonson, Sanger Unified's Director of Pupil Services. ""It stayed that way for 10 days.""According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the illness affects mostly children, but can affect adults, too. It's spread through saliva, fluid from blisters or contact with a contaminated surface. It starts with a fever and can develop into sores in the mouth, blisters on the palms of the hands, soles of the feet and even the child's private parts.[The 1st parent's] youngest still has a scar from the blisters on his toes. ""The middle one started with a fever, then 3 sores in his mouth and then blisters. 3 days later, his brother got it, then days later, the baby,"" she says.Fresno Pediatrician Veronica Ramirez says her office has been busy with cases of the disease in recent weeks. ""It seems more prevalent this year than last year, and just seems to keep spreading and spreading."" Ramirez says doctors won't prescribe antibiotics, because this is a virus. ""It needs to run its course. It lasts about 7 days,"" she says. ""The treatment is general supportive for fever, sore throat, mouth pain. Controlling those symptoms is important with ibuprofen or tylenol.""Sanger Unified posted a message on its Facebook page warning parents that a number of students got the virus. ""We're telling parents to keep a close eye and see if the kids aren't feeling well, or have developed the blisters,"" says Salomonson. ""They can return once the blisters are healed. They have to go to the nurse to get cleared."" Monday [2 May 2016], custodians were applying a 2nd layer of disinfectant in areas commonly used by students.Everyone agrees, stopping the spread of hand, foot and mouth begins with basic hygiene. Children are being reminded of the importance of washing their hands, covering their coughs, and not sharing utensils.[Byline: Liz Gonzalez]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Two types, coxsackievirus A16 (CV-A16) and enterovirus 71 (EV-71), are involved in most cases of hand, foot and mouth (HFMD), but other EV-A types and some echoviruses have also been associated with this pathology. In Europe and North America, it is not a notifiable disease but epidemiological studies of outbreaks caused by different EV-A types (CV-A16, CV-A10 and CV-A6) have been described in recent years. EV-71 also has been detected in several European countries and the USA and, although rare, infections with fatal outcomes have been reported.HFMD generally is a mild illness that causes sores in or on the mouth and on the hands, feet, and sometimes the buttocks and legs. The sores may be painful. The illness usually doesn't last more than a week or so. The disease is common in children but can also occur in adults. It can occur at any time of year but is most common in the summer and fall.The virus spreads easily through coughing and sneezing. It can also spread through infected stool, such as when you change a diaper or when a young child gets stool on his or her hands and then touches objects that other children might then put in their mouths. Often the disease breaks out within a community.It usually takes 3 to 6 days for a person to get symptoms of hand, foot and mouth disease after being exposed to the virus.(Partly excerpted/edited from <http://www.webmd.com/children/guide/hand-foot-and-mouth-disease-topic-overview>.) - Mod.LKA map of California may be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>.]
