AllAfrica, The Monitor report [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201605041014.html>Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) is selling yellow fever (YF) vaccines it got free of charge from the National Medical Stores (NMS), the State minister for Primary Healthcare Sarah Opendi has said.According to Ms Opendi, the Health ministry is investigating why. ""Some colleagues have told me Kampala Capital City Authority is charging Shs 150 000 [USD 45], though the official figure is Shs 100 000 [USD 30] for the vaccine. The matter was brought to my attention yesterday,"" Ms Opendi said during plenary on Tue 3 May [2016]. ""We [Health ministry officials] are, therefore, asking Kampala Capital City Authority why it is charging [over] Shs 100 000 yet the National Medical Stores gave it the vaccine free of charge,"" she added.Ms Opendi promised to update Parliament on Wed 4 May [2016] on the explanation the Health ministry would have got from KCCA. She was responding to Budadiri West Member of Parliament Mr Nandala Mafabi who had asked the Health State minister to explain why KCCA's yellow fever jabs are expensive. Ms Opendi said it could be that some of the vaccines were sourced from private entities. And that could have been because the government had for some months not been importing and supplying the various health facilities with the vaccine.Kasilo county MP Mr Elijah Okupa said KCCA should be stopped from charging people for the vaccine [they] got from NMS and that the authority should be compelled to refund people who had paid for the vaccine.What KCCA says--------------However, when contacted, KCCA spokesperson Peter Kaujju said City Hall clinic has been administering YF vaccine for the last 30 years and that the authority bought 3000 doses NMS. ""We also bought some vaccines from a supplier called Laboret. But the number of people who need the vaccine is overwhelming,"" Mr Kaujju said.On average, Mr Kaujju said KCCA gets about 300 cases of people who need the vaccine daily. He also dismissed claims of inflated price for the vaccine. ""It's not true we inflated the price. We sell each vaccine at Shs 100 000,"" he added.Yellow fever------------Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes. The WHO says there is no specific treatment for YF. Treatment is symptomatic, aimed at reducing the symptoms for the comfort of the patient.Vaccination is the most important preventive measure against YF. The vaccine is safe, affordable, and highly effective. A single dose of YF vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against YF disease and a booster dose of YF vaccine is not needed. The vaccine provides effective immunity within 30 days for 99 percent of persons vaccinated.In Uganda, some cases have been reported in Masaka and Bugiri. However, there are only 4 YF vaccination centres in Uganda; 3 of them are in Kampala and the 4th is in Wakiso district -- all in central Uganda. Over the last month [April 2016], the need for the YF jabs has increased -- especially among people who intend to travel -- outside Uganda. Many border officials do not allow travelers to cross countries borders without 1st presenting their YF vaccination cards.[The] WHO notes that between 2007 and 2016, 14 countries have completed preventive YF vaccination campaigns: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, C̫te d'Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo. Nigeria and Sudan have been implementing the campaigns. The Yellow Fever Initiative is financially supported by the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI Alliance), the European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO), the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), Ministries of Health, and the country-level partners.[Byline: Nelson Wesonga, Job Bwire]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Some key information is missing from this report. How many doses of yellow fever (YF) vaccine are available for sale and for administration now? Given the ongoing YF outbreak in central Uganda, is the currently available stock of YF vaccine adequate to meet the projected campaign scheduled to begin sometime this month (May 2016)? Assuming that the vaccine is available for sale, what proportion of the population is able to afford it, given that in 2012, the median daily income in Uganda was USD 3.36? If the cost of the vaccine is beyond the financial reach of many, the sale of cheaper black market (but likely inactive) vaccines and fake YF vaccination certificates is likely to occur.A HealthMap of Uganda can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/97>. - Mod.TY][Yesterday, ProMED received the following from a usually reliable source: ""When will Uganda start vaccinating along the highway?  At the Kenya border? The campaign in Masanga and Rukungiri will is scheduled from 16 - 21 May, nothing planned at the border with Kenya, it is still being investigated. The vaccine (714,579 doses from ICG) were received in the country yesterday."" - Mod.LM]******[2] Rukungiri Date: Thu 5 May 2016 Source: AllAfrica, The Monitor report [edited] <http://allafrica.com/stories/201605050168.html>On Tuesday [3 May 2016] 3 people suspected to be suffering from yellow fever have been admitted to a health centre in Rukungiri District.The district laboratory focal person, Mr John Paul Agaba, on Tuesday said the trio had been admitted to Kebisoni health centre IV. The facility has been turned into an assessment and treatment centre for all disease outbreaks.One patient was treated for yellow fever in Rukungiri last month [April 2016].Mr Agaba said blood samples from the 3 have been sent to the Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe for testing.""We are waiting for their results before we confirm that it is yellow fever, though previously we had one patient,"" he said. He added: ""We have just treated and discharged another 2 who we thought had it [yellow fever] but never had it so we shall continue to rely on results we get from the Virus Research Institute before we conclude on what such patients are suffering from.""The outbreak of yellow fever was last month confirmed by the Ministry of Health in Masaka, Ntungamo and Rukungiri districts. It is also in neigbouring DR Congo. Yellow fever is a viral infection transmitted through a mosquito-carrying yellow fever virus. Some of the signs are rapid onset of fever, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting, general body weakness, yellowing of the eyes, loss of appetite, and unexplained bleeding. It can be prevented by vaccination. According to mayoclinic.org, a single dose of the yellow fever vaccine provides protection for at least 10 years. The vaccine is considered safest for those between 9 months and 60 years.[Byline: Edson Kinene]-- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The Rukungiri district is located in the southern tip of Uganda, relatively near to the DR Congo. If these cases are laboratory confirmed as YF, it would be of interest to know if they are imported from the DR Congo or Angola or are locally acquired. If local, they may be spill-over cases from the sylvan (forest) cycle of transmission. If these really are YF cases, there should be a rapid epidemiological response to determine if there are other cases in the district, surveillance should be intensified and a vaccination effort should be initiated immediately. - Mod.TY]
