CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy) News [edited]<http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2016/05/news-scan-may-05-2016>The genetic makeup of H5N6 avian flu isolates from 2 people infected in Guangdong province, China, in December 2015 differs fairly substantially from human isolates from the same province in 2014 and shows evidence of increased resistance, a worrisome sign, according to a letter yesterday [4 May 2016] in Emerging Infectious Diseases.Chinese researchers said that although the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes were similar in the 2015 and 2014 viruses, all 6 internal genes differed.The PB-2 gene from one of the 2015 isolates appears to have been derived from an H6N6 virus isolated from a duck, while all its other genes were derived from H5N6 viruses that have been circulating in poultry since 2013. The other 2015 isolate showed high nucleotide identity with an H5N6 human virus collected in 2015 in Yunnan province. Its 6 internal genes appear to have come from H9N2 viruses in animals.""These findings show that the circulating H5N6 virus in southern China has reassorted with enzootic H6N6 and H9N2 viruses, resulting in new H5N6 viruses that are capable of infecting humans,"" the authors wrote.In addition, the 2014 human H5N6 isolates had no mutations associated with reduced sensitivity to adamantane antiviral drugs, but 2 of the 3 isolates from 2015 (the 2 from Guangdong and one from Yunnan) have the 31N amino acid in their M2 gene, suggesting that they have acquired resistance. ""Thus, this virus lineage could be a great threat to public health,"" the authors conclude.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The H9N2 viruses have become known as potential 'facilitator' novel influenza viruses that could transmit to humans from animals/birds; they do so through widespread endemicity in free range and commercial poultry, thereby providing ample opportunities for reassortment events.As is the case with H5N1 viruses, the H9N2 viruses have also been shown to be donors of the 6 internal genes for influenza A(H7N9) viruses as well.As highlighted by this report, influenza A(H5N6) viruses are gradually undergoing evolutionary changes and acquiring mutations that make them more 'fit' to infect humans.However, as shown by many novel viruses such as H5N1, H9N2 and more recently the H7N9 viruses, any novel potentially pandemic influenza virus must complete 3 prerequisites in order to easily cause widespread human disease:1. The influenza virus is novel or new to human population, meaning there is little or no immunity to it in majority of humans2. It is capable of causing infection in humans3. It is easily transmissible from human to humanFor most novel viruses, although elements 1 and 2 are fulfilled, the final 'fitness to transmit' requirement is generally not completed as is the case with current circulating influenza A(H5N6) and A(H7N9) viruses. - Mod.UBA]******[2] Human infection with avian influenza A(H5N6) virus - China Date: Fri 6 May 2016 Source: WHO Disease Outbreak News [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/6-may-2016-ah5n6-china/en/>Between 21 and 26 Apr 2016, the National Health and Family Planning Commission (NHFPC) of China notified WHO of 2 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N6) virus. Details of the cases--------------------1. A 35-year-old male living in Shen Nong Jia forest region, Hubei Province developed fever on 9 Apr [2016] and sought medical care. He was admitted to hospital for treatment on 12 Apr [2016] and is currently in critical condition. The patient's clinical sample was confirmed to be A(H5N6) virus nucleic acid positive by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC) on 21 Apr [2016]. He had exposure to a live poultry market before symptom onset. Close contacts of the patient remain healthy. 2. An 11-year-old female living in Zhuzhou City, Hunan Province developed fever and cough on 11 Apr [2016]. As her symptoms worsened on 12 Apr [2016], the patient was admitted to hospital for treatment. She is currently in stable condition. The patient's clinical sample was confirmed to be A(H5N6) virus nucleic acid positive by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC) on 24 Apr [2016]. She was exposed to live poultry before onset of the disease. Close contacts of the patient remain healthy. Public health response----------------------The Chinese Government has taken the following surveillance and control measures: - strengthening surveillance, analysis and research; - further enhancing the medical care of the case; - conducting public risk communication and releasing information. WHO risk assessment-------------------This report does not change the overall public health risk from avian influenza A(H5N6) viruses. Although influenza A(H5N6) has caused severe infection in humans, until now human infections with the virus seem to be sporadic with no ongoing human to human transmission and close contacts of the case remain healthy. However, the characterization of this virus is ongoing and its implication to the evolution and emergence of a pandemic strain is unknown. The risk of international disease spread is considered to be low at this point in time. WHO continues to assess the epidemiological situation and conduct further risk assessment based on the latest information. WHO advice ----------WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid poultry farms, contact with animals in live bird markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travellers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern. WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, in order to ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>[A HealthMap/ProMED map is available at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>. - Mod.UBA]
