WHO Situation Report [edited]<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/yellowsitrep_5May2016_eng.pdf>Angola- In Angola, from 5 Dec 2015 to 4 May 2016, the Ministry of Health has reported a total of 2149 suspect cases with 277 deaths and 661 laboratory confirmed cases. 70 percent of these cases are reported in Luanda province. There are confirmed cases in 13 of the 18 provinces and suspect cases are present in all provinces. Local transmission is still described in 6 provinces, in 14 districts, including Luanda.- The outbreak in Angola remains of high concern due to persistent local transmission in Luanda despite the fact that almost 6 million people have been vaccinated, local transmission has been reported in 6 provinces (urban areas and main ports) and there is a high risk of spread to neighbouring countries.- The risk of establishment of local transmission in other provinces where no autochthonous cases are reported is high. DRC has reported cases imported from 2 provinces in Angola where no local transmission is currently reported (Cabinda and Zaire). Cabinda is an exclave and province of Angola and is separated from the rest of Angola by a narrow strip of territory belonging to the DRC and bounded on the north by the Republic of the Congo. The risk of effective local transmission is high due to expatriates working in this province. This poses also a further risk of transmission in DRC and Republic of the Congo.- Response. Vaccinations campaigns started 1st in Luanda province at the beginning of February [2016] and mid-April [2016] in Benguela and Huambo. Data indicates insufficient vaccination coverage among the 3 provinces.- Response. 1.7 million vaccines are to be delivered in Angola shortly and a further 700 000 have been requested to the International Coordinating Group (ICG).Democratic Republic of the Congo- On 22 Mar 2016, the Ministry of Health of DRC notified human cases of yellow fever in connection with Angola. The yellow fever outbreak was officially declared on 23 Apr [2016]. As of 4 May [2016], DRC has reported 44 yellow fever cases linked to Angola, 39 of those are laboratory confirmed cases with 37 imported from Angola, reported in Kongo central and Kinshasa provinces, and 2 autochthonous cases in Ndjili, Kinshasa and Matadi, Kongo central province.- The possibility of locally acquired infections is under investigation for at least 10 non-classified cases in both Kinshasa and Kongo central provinces. For a further 5 probable cases results are still pending at IP-D.- Given the large Angolan community in Kinshasa, the presence and the activity of the _Aedes_ mosquito, the potential establishment of local cycle of transmission in DRC in general and in the whole of Kinshasa in particular, the situation is of high concern and needs to be monitored with extreme attention.- Response. DRC and Uganda are GAVI Alliance eligible countries thus the vaccination campaigns in these countries will be covered by GAVI Alliance.- Response. 2.2 million vaccines and ancillaries are to arrive in DRC by mid-May [2016].Uganda- On 9 Apr 2016, Uganda notified WHO of yellow fever cases in the south-western district of Masaka. On 21 Apr [2016], one yellow fever case was confirmed in the eastern district of Rukungiri. As of 4 May [2016], 41 suspect cases of yellow fever cases have been reported in 7 districts. 7 cases have been laboratory confirmed (5 in Masaka, one in Rukungiri and one in Kalangala).- According to available information, the clusters of yellow fever in Uganda are not linked. The sequencing results indicate high similarities with the virus which has caused the outbreak in 2010. In addition, these results show that these clusters are not epidemiologically linked to Angola. [These are likely sylvan (forest) transmission cases that have spilled over to humans. - Mod.TY]Other countries bordering Angola- On 28 Apr [2016] the Ministry of Health of Namibia reported one suspect case of yellow fever, imported from Benguela, Angola. The case is a 27-year-old female who was hospitalized 1st in Benguela and then at the Engela district hospital in the Ohangwena region (near the border with Angola). Samples have been sent for diagnosis, confirmation is pending.- No suspected cases of yellow fever have been reported in the Republic of the Congo or Zambia. However, Namibia and Zambia share a long and porous border with Angola and controlling population movements between the 3 countries will be challenging.- 3 countries have reported confirmed yellow fever cases exported from Angola: DRC (38 cases), Kenya (2 cases) and People's Republic of China (11 cases). Namibia has also reported a suspect yellow fever case from Angola. This highlights the risk of international spread through non-immunised travellers.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The continuation of the outbreak in Angola and the appearance of cases in the DR Congo and in Uganda are worrisome. In Angola, this report indicates that there is insufficient vaccination coverage among 3 provinces where there is ongoing yellow fever (YF) virus transmission, but does not indicate if the problem is shortage of vaccine or teams to deliver it. Previous reports have questioned if there are adequate vaccine stocks to cover all areas in Angola where cases are occurring, as well as the DR Congo and Uganda. It has been proposed that 1/5 or 1/10 the usual dose be administered to extend the coverage. Earlier studies indicate that this is effective in providing immunity for a greater number of people. It might be a good idea to extend available stocks by, at least temporarily, authorizing emergency use of the lower 1/10 dose before any more of the existing stock is used up. Even if that dose does not provide lasting immunity, it would prevent excess deaths.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the locations of the African countries mentioned can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3948>. - Mods.TY/JW]
