PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004554 [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=info:doi/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004554>Amy Y. Vittor, Blas Armien, Publio Gonzalez, Jean-Paul Carrera, Claudia Dominguez, Anayansi Valderrama, Greg E. Glass, Davis Beltran, Julio Cisneros, Eryu Wang, Alex Castillo, Brechla Moreno, Scott C. Weaver. Epidemiology of Emergent Madariaga Encephalitis in a Region with Endemic Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis: Initial Host Studies and Human Cross-Sectional Study in Darien, Panama.Abstract--------BackgroundNeurotropic arboviral infections are an important cause of encephalitis. A zoonotic, vector-borne alphavirus, Madariaga virus (MADV; formerly known as South American eastern equine encephalitis virus), caused its 1st documented human outbreak in 2010 in Darien, Panama, where the genetically similar Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) is endemic. We report the results of a seroprevalence survey of animals and humans, illustrating contrasting features of MADV and VEEV ecology and epidemiology.MethodsSmall mammals were trapped in 42 sites in Darien, Panama, using Sherman traps, Tomahawk traps, and mist nets for bats. Blood was tested for the presence of neutralizing antibodies to MADV and VEEV. In addition, bird sera collected in 2007 in Chagres, Panama, were tested for MADV and VEEV neutralizing antibodies. Viremia was ascertained by RT-PCR. Human exposure to these 2 viruses was determined by IgG ELISA, followed by plaque reduction neutralization tests. To identify relevant risk factors for MADV or VEEV exposure, logistic regression analysis was performed, and the most parsimonious model was selected based on the Akaike information criterion.ResultsThe animal survey yielded 32 bats (16 species), 556 rodents (12 species), and 20 opossums (4 species). The short-tailed cane mouse (_Zygodontomys brevicauda_) found abundantly in pasture and farms, had the highest MADV seroprevalence (8.3 percent). For VEEV, the shrub and forest-dwelling long-whiskered rice rat (_Transandinomys bolivaris_) had the highest seroprevalence (19.0 percent). Viremia was detected in one animal (_Z. brevicauda_). Of the 159 bird sera (50 species) tested, none was positive for either virus. In humans (n = 770), neutralizing antibodies to MADV and VEEV were present in 4.8 percent and 31.5 percent, respectively. MADV seropositivity was positively associated with cattle ranching, farming, and fishing. Having VEEV antibodies and shrubs near the house diminished risk. Age, forest work, farming and fishing were risk factors for VEEV, while having MADV antibodies, glazed windows, waste pick-up and piped water were protective.ConclusionOur findings suggest that the short-tailed cane mouse and the long-whiskered rice rat serve as hosts for MADV and VEEV, respectively. The preferred habitat of these rodent species coincides with areas associated with human infection risk. Our findings also indicate that MADV emerged recently in humans, and that the transmission cycles of these 2 sympatric alphaviruses differ spatially and in host utilization.Author Summary--------------Arthropod-borne viruses are important causes of encephalitis. In 2010, the 1st documented human outbreak of the mosquito-borne, zoonotic Madariaga virus (MADV) occurred in the Darien region of Panama. Neither its epidemiology nor its transmission cycle is understood. In this study, the authors searched for possible animal hosts of this virus, and sought to describe its epidemiology. They contrast the findings with those for Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV), an endemic, genetically similar virus. _Zygodontomys brevicauda_, the short-tailed cane mouse, had the highest seroprevalence for MADV. This rodent species is most often found in pasture and farm land. Indeed, the risk factors for human MADV exposure were cattle ranching and farming. The animal with highest seroprevalence for VEEV, the long-whiskered rice rat (_Transandinomys bolivaris_), commonly occurs in forest, and the epidemiological risk factors included working in the forest. Farming and fishing were risk factors for exposure to both viruses, and having antibodies to one virus diminished the risk of being positive for the other. Increasing prevalence with age was seen for VEEV, confirming that VEEV is endemic in the region. This association was absent for MADV, suggesting that this virus emerged recently to infect humans.--Communicated by: ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Last year (2015) there were reported cases of equine encephalitis in equine animals and in humans in Darien province, Panama. Those reports indicated that there were 12 confirmed cases of human equine encephalitis, of which 11 cases were caused by Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV), which includes 1 death, and 1 case of eastern equine encephalitis (EEE). The above report indicates that the previously reported EEE cases were due to Madriaga virus -- formerly known as South American eastern equine encephalitis virus.Both MADV and VEE viruses occur in Panama. The case fatality rate for humans infected with VEEV is relatively low -- less than 1 percent, whereas it is much higher in individuals with neurological disease from EEEV infections and perhaps with MADV infections as well. Children are more severely affected by VEEV infection than adults are. It would be of interest to know which VEEV subtype is involved in these cases, as subtype IAB or IC can cause massive equine epizootics over wide geographic areas with spillover to many humans. Subtype ID usually causes a few sporadic human cases (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20100617.2034).The authors point out that further studies are needed in order to further define MADV and VEEV transmission factors and epidemiology in the Darien region. Also needed are vector studies (including blood meal analyses, infection rates and ecology), experimental infections of putative rodent hosts to determine the amplitude and duration of viremia, and studies on land use and land cover.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Panama can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/18>. - Mod.TY]
