Eurosurveillance 21 (18) DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.18.30222 [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22470>Haneche F, Leparc-Goffart I, Simon F, Hentzien M, Martinez-Pourcher V, Caumes E, Maquart M. Rift Valley fever in kidney transplant recipient returning from Mali with viral RNA detected in semen up to 4 months from symptom onset, France, autumn 2015.AbstractA 29-year-old kidney transplant recipient returning from Mali was diagnosed with Rift Valley fever (RVF) in France in autumn 2015. The patient was immunosuppressed due to his renal transplant. IgM and IgG specific to RVF virus (RVFV) were detected in cerebrospinal fluid and blood up to 2 months after symptom onset, whereas in urine, RVFV genomic RNA was detected by RT-PCR up to 3 months, and in semen up to 4 months post symptom onset.ConclusionWe report the 1st RVF viral RNA detection in urine and in human semen that did not have gross blood contamination. No information about infectivity could be determined as viral isolation failed. The RVFV was previously detected in cattle semen but not in humans. Infectious Ebola virus can be present in semen more than 3 months after recovery and is transmitted to other persons by sexual route. Similarly, Zika virus has been isolated from the semen of a patient 24 days post onset of symptoms. Ebola virus RNA was detected more than 9 months post-exposure. Duration of virus persistence in semen may be linked to the immunosuppressive status of a patient or a viral characteristic as for Ebola and Zika virus. As a precaution, we recommend to abstain or engage only in protected intercourse when RVFV is detected in semen, until complete clearance of the virus [occurs].RVFV genomic RNA was detected in semen 4 months after the onset of symptoms in an immunocompromised patient. Testing semen could be a new method for diagnosing RVF retrospectively and presence of RVFV genomic RNA raises the possibility that RVF could be transmitted sexually.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This is an unusual case, in that the patient was immunosuppressed. It will be interesting to see if virus is present in urine and semen of infected individuals who are not immunocompromised. ProMED-mail subscribers interested in the clinical details of this case are urged to read the complete report. ProMED-mail has posted only one previous instance of RVF in Mali, and that in livestock, and apparently the cases were not laboratory confirmed. The individual's source of exposure to the virus is not clear. The patient was reported to have taken care of his father's livestock in Mali. He did not report contact with ill or dead animals, nor mention spontaneous abortions in the small ruminants, which is common among RVF virus-infected animals. He did mention consumption of raw milk. That could have been the source of his exposure to the virus, or perhaps via mosquitoes.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Mali can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/50>. - Mod.TY]
