Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) [summ., edited]<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleID=2522030#TheYellowFeverVaccine>Ref: Lucey D, Gostin LO: A yellow fever epidemic. A new global health emergency? J Amer Med Assoc 2016; doi:10.1001/jama.2016.6606----------------------------------------------------------------------The yellow fever vaccine------------------------A licensed, live attenuated, yellow fever vaccine has been available for decades, conferring lifelong protection within 10 days in more than 90 percent of individuals who received the vaccine. National border rules currently require a yellow fever card showing proof of vaccination within 10 years for epidemiologically at-risk travelers. Although the yellow fever vaccine is well tolerated, it is not recommended in non epidemic settings for individuals with severe immunodeficiency, pregnant women, infants, or individuals with severe egg allergies. Individuals older than 60 years are at higher risk for a rare, but serious complication, vaccine-associated viscerotropic disease. The WHO recommends routine vaccination for children living in at-risk countries for yellow fever, with community immunity conferred by vaccination rates of 60-80 percent.Mass vaccination campaigns in conjunction with mosquito control, surveillance, and coordinated responses are urgently needed in the event of an outbreak. The WHO serves as the Secretariat for the International Coordinating Group for yellow fever vaccine provision, with partners such as the United Nations (UN) Children's Fund, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, and Doctors Without Borders (M̩decins Sans Fronti̬res). The International Coordinating Group maintains a vaccine stockpile for rapid response; however, a serious vaccine shortage is anticipated if yellow fever spreads to other countries or regions. Surge capacity is currently limited because specific pathogen-free chicken eggs are needed to produce the vaccine [and the availability of those eggs is limited].On 2 May 2016, the Democratic Republic of Congo announced plans to vaccinate nearly 2 million individuals in Kinshasa and Kongo Central, suspecting local transmission. This campaign, along with Angola, could be a tipping point in exhausting global vaccine supplies.The WHO's Emergency Use Assessment and Listing (EUAL) procedures, first introduced for the Ebola virus, could be adapted to safeguard the yellow fever vaccine supply. International experts have urged using 1/5 of the normal vaccine dose in Angola to avert acute shortages if the virus spreads. If this suggested practice is carried out, regulatory hurdles would likely be encountered, and there would also be uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of immunity, especially in children. Monath et al recently recommended ""invoking the EUAL [procedures] now, rather than waiting for a major yellow fever vaccine shortage to occur."" Stewardship of scarce vaccine supplies is essential, but requires the WHO's Director-General to declare a public health emergency of international concern or determine it is ""in the best interest of public health."" Given the world's vital health security interests, the WHO's director-general should use EUAL procedures to authorize a reduced vaccine dose to control the epidemic in Angola.Time to convene an emergency committee--------------------------------------It is only by convening an emergency committee that the WHO's Director-General could declare a public health emergency of international concern. Whether this emergency committee recommends declaring a public health emergency of international concern, it would advise the WHO's Director-General on responding to ongoing and future yellow fever outbreaks. There are strong reasons to convene an emergency committee now. The looming threat of a severe yellow fever vaccine shortage exists amid epidemics in Africa, and potentially in Latin America and Asia. Even if the emergency committee does not recommend a public health emergency of international concern, it could recommend invoking EUAL procedures for use of a reduced vaccine dose.Among multiple needed steps, the WHO's director-general (based on the emergency committee's advice) should convene and coordinate stakeholder meetings with yellow fever vaccine manufacturers to catalyze a surge in production; incentivize and coordinate innovation in research and development for non-egg-based yellow fever vaccines; coordinate mosquito vector control for yellow fever, benefitting also prevention measures for the ongoing Zika virus epidemic. Recommendations are already in place to prevent infections by vaccinating travelers to Angola. Convening a yellow fever emergency committee would not require a declaration of a public health emergency of international concern, as demonstrated by 10 Middle East respiratory syndrome committees convened between 2013 and 2015, in which a global health emergency was not declared.Going forward: a standing emergency committee---------------------------------------------The WHO has responded much more quickly to this yellow fever epidemic than with either the Ebola virus or even the Zika virus. The WHO's Director-General traveled to Angola in early April [2016], working with international partners to roll out a mass yellow fever vaccination campaign -- expressing the concern that ""the whole world could be at risk"" of a yellow fever epidemic. Global health advocates should not have to call for convening an emergency committee for each new international health threat. Instead, the WHO should establish a standing emergency committee to meet regularly to advise the Director-General whether to declare an emergency, take necessary steps to avert a crisis, or both. The complexities and apparent increased frequency of emerging infectious disease threats, and the catastrophic consequences of delays in the international response, make it no longer tenable to place the sole responsibility and authority with the WHO's Director-General to convene currently ad hoc emergency committees. As the WHO begins the election campaign for a new Director-General, it is an opportune moment to strengthen its capacity and leadership in global health security.The UN's high-level panel on the global health crises called Ebola a ""preventable tragedy."" If the ongoing panepidemics of Zika-caused neurological syndromes or yellow fever eventually lead to catastrophic consequences, then the panel's admonition could come true: ""If the WHO does not successfully reform, the next major pandemic will cause thousands of otherwise preventable deaths. This may be the last opportunity to ensure that the WHO is empowered to build an effective emergency preparedness and response capacity with the necessary political leadership. Another failure to perform may necessitate consideration of alternate UN institutional response mechanisms.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report succinctly summarizes the yellow fever (YF) vaccination situation that has been reported in ProMED-mail posts citing WHO situation and other reports and related comments. It would be very desirable if the WHO was structured to deal quickly with outbreaks such as YF in Africa.Recognizing the limited supplies of YF vaccine, ProMED-mail moderators Jack Woodall and Tom Yuill and colleagues have repeatedly called for reducing the dose to 1/5-1/10 the usual volume to be able to cover the populations at risk, especially in Angola and the DR Congo. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/38681>, <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/165>.]
