AllAfrica, Radio Dabanga report [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201605090692.html>Sudan: 900 Measles Cases in 2016, Vaccination Campaign Starts Next Week-----------------------------------------------------------------------Between 1 Jan and 29 Apr 2016, out of 2546 suspected cases with fever and rash, 907 were confirmed as measles (465 confirmed by laboratory and 442 epidemiologically linked to lab confirmed cases), according to the Sudanese Ministry of Health (MoH).According to the latest humanitarian bulletin by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), compared to the similar period of 2015, the numbers are considerably lower. During the same period of 2015, there were 4131 suspected cases, of which 2435 were confirmed as measles, according to WHO's Weekly Measles Surveillance report.According to the MoH, most of the measles cases are in the states that did not implement the measles vaccination campaign last year [2015], especially the Kordofan region, which accounts for about 75 per cent of the confirmed cases. There are 365 confirmed measles cases reported from West Kordofan, 268 cases from North Kordofan and 46 cases in South Kordofan.According to the MoH measles surveillance unit, during the last week of 11 Apr [2016], deaths suspected to be from measles were reported in Babanusa locality, West Kordofan State amongst new South Sudanese arrivals. An investigation team was sent to the area and found out that deaths were not related to measles. While the community initially was refusing measles vaccination, the emergency health team and officials managed to vaccinate all the children aged between 6 months and 15 years in the area. The team also carried out other immediate response interventions: administering case management, ensuring availability of essential medicine, strengthening the surveillance and alert system and health education sessions.Measles vaccination campaign will start on 7 May [2016].The response started last year [2015] following an outbreak of measles in various parts of the country and covered 13 states. The 2nd phase of the response, including a mass immunisation campaign, is scheduled to take place in May 2016. The West Kordofan part of the campaign will be implemented during 7-16 May [2016] in addition to scaling up of all other outbreak response capacity. In the remaining states of Sennar, White Nile, Blue Nile, North and South Kordofan the campaign will be held on 20-29 May [2016] with funding from the Sudan Humanitarian Fund (SHF) to cover all children under the age of 15.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Measles: South SudanDate: Tue 10 May 2016Source: Gurtong [edited]<http://www.gurtong.net/ECM/Editorial/tabid/124/ctl/ArticleView/mid/519/articleId/19210/Health-Partners-Response-Underway-To-Curb-Measles-Outbreaks-in-11-Counties.aspx>Health partners: response underway to curb measles outbreaks in 11 counties---------------------------------------------------------------------------Health partners in South Sudan say they are responding to a countrywide outbreak of measles, with 11 counties confirming the outbreak since the beginning of 2016.According to the humanitarian bulletin released yesterday [9 May 2016], at least 832 suspected measles cases have been reported since January [2016], of which 76 cases have been confirmed.""In April 2016, new measles outbreaks were confirmed in Malakal Protection of Civilians (PoC) site, Yirol West and Aweil North Counties,"" reads part of the bulletin. ""These outbreaks come in addition to the already reported outbreaks in Juba (Mangatain and UN House PoC site), Aweil West, Mayendit, Mayom, Leer, Rubkona, Twic and Abyei.""""This is a sharp increase compared to the same period in 2015, when only one County -- Rubkona -- had reported measles cases."" Health partners have conducted vaccination campaigns and reached more than 156 400 children aged 6 months to 15 years in Abyei, Ajak Kuak, Mayom, Leer/Gandor.""Health partners working in Bentiu PoC managed to vaccinate more than 94 per cent of the target population during the measles vaccination campaign,"" said Dr. Beldina Gikundi, IOM health officer. The partners also continued the vaccination campaigns in Bentiu Protection of Civilians (PoC) site, Rubkona, Rubkuai, Aweil Central, Aweil West and Juba counties between February and April [2016].Plans are also underway for reactive vaccination in Malakal, Yirol West and Aweil North and follow up vaccination for children who were missed is ongoing in counties that have already been covered. ""We sincerely hope that this will reduce the morbidity and mortality from measles in the PoC,"" said Dr. Gikundu.Measles is among the 5 main causes of illness in South Sudan. Although measles can be prevented by vaccinating children, the conflict in South Sudan has impeded immunization efforts and the country has low immunization coverage, with 14 counties having vaccination rates of less than 5 per cent at the beginning of 2016.Measles is a highly infectious viral illness that can be very unpleasant and sometimes lead to serious complications. The initial symptoms of measles develop around 10 days after you're infected. These can include: cold-like symptoms, such as a runny nose, sneezing, and a cough, sore, red eyes that may be sensitive to light, a high temperature (fever) and small greyish-white spots on the inside of the cheeks.[Byline: Jok P Mayom]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[With the war going on and lack of infrastructure, it is very difficult to control or get samples to a lab for confirmation. - Corr.SB][Measles is an acute viral disease. Even though a cost-effective vaccine has been available since 1959, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), measles remains one of the leading causes of death among young children, particularly in developing countries. More than 95 per cent of measles deaths occur in low-income countries with weak health infrastructures. For this reason, the low level of vaccination as a consequence of war in South Sudan is of concern, especially knowing that 14 counties have vaccination rates of less than 5 per cent.A map showing Sudan and South Sudan can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/96>. - Mod.LK]******[3] Measles: USA (Memphis, Tennessee)Date: Tue 10 May 2016Source: Breitbart [edited]<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/05/10/measles-outbreak-memphis-began-mosque/>The 1st reported case of a person with measles in the recent Memphis [Tennessee] outbreak, which now numbers 7 confirmed cases, was at a local mosque on 15 Apr 2016, according to the Shelby County Health Department.""The 1st public place where there was a public exposure potentially [to measles] was the Masjid Al-Noor Mosque on [15 Apr 2016],"" Dr. Alisa Haushalter, Director of the Shelby County Health Department, tells Breitbart News.""The mosque is one location we know that individuals who were infectious were during their infectious period, but that's not necessarily where the 1st case occurred. I don't want you to draw conclusions without sufficient information,"" she added.Haushalter acknowledged, however, that the measles outbreak could have originated with an unvaccinated for measles adult or child brought to Tennessee under the federal refugee resettlement program, something she called ""a possibility amongst many.""There had been no reported cases of measles in Shelby County for the previous 24 months, according to a spokesperson for the Tennessee Department of Health. ""There have been 9 previous cases of measles in the entire state of Tennessee in the past 12 years,"" WREG reported.The Shelby County Health Department 1st notified the public of a measles outbreak on Friday morning, 22 Apr [2016], reporting 2 confirmed cases, an adult and a child.""We take the testing [of patients for measles] to the state lab, then to CDC. We went public as soon as we received the confirmation,"" spokesperson Elizabeth Hart tells Breitbart News.As of 10 May [2016], the number of reported cases of measles in Memphis has increased to 7.According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the number of measles cases in the United States grew from 63 in 2010 to 667 in 2014. It fell to 189 in 2015. That year, ""the United States experienced a large, multi-state measles outbreak linked to an amusement park in California. The outbreak likely started from a traveler who became infected overseas with measles, then visited the amusement park while infectious; however, no source was identified.""Surprisingly, the majority of the more than 70 000 refugees resettled annually across the United States through the federal refugee resettlement program are not required to have been vaccinated for measles prior to their arrival here. ""Refugees being resettled in the United States, unlike immigrants seeking residency, have not been subject to immunization requirements,"" according to a Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) released by the CDC in January 2015. Kristen Nordlund, a spokesperson for the CDC, tells Breitbart News, ""I think you may not be reading the full MMWR, which does discuss a program that CDC set up that requires refugees from some countries to be vaccinated.""Refugees settled in the United States under the refugee resettlement program arriving from all but 6 countries -- Thailand, Nepal, Malaysia, Kenya, Ethiopia, and Uganda -- are not required to demonstrate they have received immunizations, specifically including measles, according to that January 2015 MMWR from the CDC.Of the 1601 refugees resettled in Tennessee in fiscal year 2015, 186 were resettled in Memphis, according to a report provided by Catholic Charities of Tennessee, which administers the program in the Volunteer State on behalf of the federal government under the Wilson-Fish alternative program.Less than 1 percent of those 1601 refugees (a total of 12 individuals) were from the 6 countries (Thailand, Nepal, Uganda, Kenya, Malaysia, and Ethiopia) where refugees are required to be vaccinated for measles as a condition of their entry to the United States.Of the refugees resettled in Tennessee by Catholic Charities of Tennessee under the federal refugee resettlement program, 1589 (99 percent) came from countries of origin where the United States government does not require that refugees have measles vaccinations, including 332 from Iraq, 214 from Somalia, 206 from Congo, 393 from Burma, 138 from Bhutan, 57 from Sudan, 47 from Afghanistan, and 31 from Syria.Breitbart News contacted the Office of Refugee Resettlement, the part of the Department of Health and Human Services responsible for the federal refugee resettlement program, for comment several times over the past 2 weeks but has not received a response beyond the acknowledgement they had received our original inquiry.Michael Evans, State Refugee Health Coordinator for the Tennessee Office for Refugees, part of Catholic Charities of Tennessee, the VOLAG (voluntary agency) hired by ORR to operate the federal refugee resettlement program in Tennessee, did however respond to Breitbart News.""The Tennessee Office for Refugees has not been contacted by the Shelby County Health Department, and has no information beyond what is publicly available through reputable news sources,"" Evans tells Breitbart News.This seems to be a rather curious oversight by the Shelby County Health Department, given that the 1st instance of potential exposure occurred at a mosque in Memphis likely to be frequented by refugees resettled by Catholic Charities.Evans did not deny that the vast majority of refugees resettled in Tennessee by Catholic Charities of Tennessee are not required to be vaccinated for measles prior to their arrival in the United States.He did, however, offer this statement: ""I am happy to confirm that a refugee suffering from a measles infection would not be permitted to travel to Tennessee, and our screening program has not detected a person infected with measles. As indicated in the link you provided (and also found here), a majority of refugees begin or complete their MMR series before setting foot on a plane to the U.S. Once in Tennessee, medical providers review the vaccinations that were administered overseas to determine what series need to be completed here. Additionally, in order for a refugee to adjust their status to permanent resident (a step required of all refugees), the refugee must be vaccinated against measles, as required by U.S. immigration law. The Tennessee Office for Refugees -- through the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement -- provides access to all immunizations required to adjust status.""The Tennessee Department of Health has been reluctant to provide details on the point of origin of the measles outbreak.""Due to the small number of individuals confirmed with measles in one county, our HIPAA Compliance Office has determined we may not provide any information at this time that could be used to identify an individual. We take our obligation to protect individuals -- and to protect population health -- most seriously,"" Woody McMillen, director of communication and media relations for the Tennessee Department of Health, tells Breitbart News. ... - more[Byline: Michael Patrick Leahy]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The list of countries that the US requires measles vaccinations from is interesting, but does not include hot spots such as the Philippines, Somalia, Iraq, Sudan, South Sudan etc. - Corr.SB][Measles is a highly contagious viral disease. It remains an important cause of death among young children globally, despite the availability of a safe and effective vaccine. Regional conflicts have led to displacement of large populations, which has had significant adverse effects on human health. When these refugees travel to the US, vaccination against MMR is not required from the majority of countries with measles activity. Vaccination status of newly arriving refugees should be determined upon arrival and appropriate vaccinations be provided to bring them up to date for their own protection and as a solid public health measure.A map of Tennessee, United States can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/244>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/244>.]
