CBS Pittsburgh [edited]<http://pittsburgh.cbslocal.com/2016/05/13/cdc-focusing-on-negative-pressure-rooms-in-upmc-mold-outbreak/>The federal investigation of how 4 transplant patients at UPMC [University of Pittsburgh Medical Center] hospitals contracted mold infections and then later died is ongoing. However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] has released a new report [see item 2 below] and the focus of the investigation was made abundantly clear. Investigators have yet to determine the source of the mold outbreak. However, the CDC's latest report shows an emphasis on negative pressure rooms and how unnecessary placement of patients in those rooms could cause harm and should be avoided. Those rooms are designed to draw air into the room from the outside for patients who already have a potentially airborne contagious disease. According to the report, 3 of the 4 patients with deadly mold infections were in the same room at UPMC Presbyterian Hospital. It was a negative pressure room in the Cardiothoracic Intensive Care Unit. ""Room A was the only negative pressure isolation room in the CTICU and was adjacent to a door leading to a carpeted hallway and family room. Frequent use of this door by personnel and visitors might have disturbed the airflow, allowing dust and mold spores, if present, to enter the room. None of the patients had a clinical indication requiring negative-pressure isolation,"" the report said. The 4th person who died contracted the infection at UPMC Montefiore. [This patient] initially went to UPMC Presbyterian Hospital in August 2015 to receive a double lung transplant. A month later, he was diagnosed with the infection and received treatment until February, when he died. Before his death, he and his family filed a lawsuit against UPMC alleging medical negligence. In the report, officials detailed multiple construction projects near UPMC Presbyterian and Montefiore hospitals. The CDC noted that past outbreaks were associated with hospital construction projects. Meanwhile, changes have been made including, a renovation of the CTICU and change in the anti-fungal medication that transplant patients receive. [Byline: Heather Abraham]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts <promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Fri 13 May 2016Source: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 65(18);481-482 [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6518a5.htm?s_cid=mm6518a5_w>Notes from the Field. Probable Mucormycosis Among Adult Solid Organ Transplant Recipients at an Acute Care Hospital -- Pennsylvania, 2014-2015. Novosad SA, Vasquez AM, Nambiar A, et al.On 17 Sep 2015, the Pennsylvania Department of Health (PADOH) notified CDC of a cluster of 3 potentially health care-associated mucormycete infections that occurred among solid organ transplant recipients during a 12-month period at hospital A. On 18 Sep 2015, hospital B reported that it had identified an additional transplant recipient with mucormycosis. Hospitals A and B are part of the same health care system and are connected by a pedestrian bridge. PADOH requested CDC's assistance with an on-site investigation, which started on 22 Sep [2015], to identify possible sources of infection and prevent additional infections.Mucormycosis is a severe, often fatal infection caused by a group of angioinvasive molds. Outbreaks of health care-associated mucormycosis have been identified, most commonly in persons with marked immunosuppression, such as bone marrow and solid organ transplant recipients (1,2). Sources of these outbreaks are difficult to determine given that mucormycetes are ubiquitous environmental organisms. Past outbreaks have been associated with contaminated medical supplies and hospital construction projects (3,4). Performing an Infection Control Risk Assessment (ICRA) before and during construction or renovation projects is an important measure that can reduce the risk for health care-associated mucormycosis (4,5). An ICRA is a multidisciplinary approach used to mitigate environmental sources of microbes and to prevent infectious hazards through use of built environment design, ventilation and infrastructure support, and control measures implemented during construction or renovation (6).A probable health care-associated case of mucormycosis was defined as identification of a mucormycete by culture or molecular testing in a diagnostic specimen from a person who had a history of solid organ transplantation, and admission to hospital A or B during May 2014-September 2015 for 14 days or longer, within the 30 days before diagnosis. The period for cases was expanded beyond the 12-month period of infections to account for exposure time during hospitalization. Suspected cases were similarly defined as identification of a mucormycete in a diagnostic specimen by histopathology only or association with a hospital stay of 7-13 days before diagnosis. No infections were considered confirmed health care-associated cases because of uncertainties regarding the incubation period of mucormycosis (3).The initial 3 cases were classified as probable and the 4th case as suspected. All 4 patients underwent solid organ transplantation during the same admission as their mucormycosis diagnosis and were receiving immunosuppressive medications as well as voriconazole for antifungal prophylaxis. The 3 probable cases were in patients who were primary heart (2 cases) and lung transplant (1 case) recipients who underwent transplantation 31-93 days before mucormycosis diagnosis. The suspected case occurred in a patient who had been admitted for a 2nd liver transplant and was taking immunosuppressive medications at home; mucormycosis was diagnosed in this patient 13 days after admission, although signs compatible with invasive fungal infection started earlier in the admission. At least 2 different mucormycete species were isolated from the 4 patients. Three of the 4 patients had died before the arrival of the PADOH/CDC team.The 3 patients with probable health care-associated mucormycosis all received care in the same room (room A) of the 20-bed cardiothoracic intensive care unit (CTICU) in hospital A for 14-58 days between their transplantations and mucormycosis diagnoses. Room A was the only negative-pressure isolation room in the CTICU and was adjacent to a door leading to a carpeted hallway and family room. Frequent use of this door by personnel and visitors might have disturbed airflow, allowing dust and mold spores, if present, to enter the room. None of the patients had a clinical indication requiring negative-pressure isolation. The patient with suspected health care-associated mucormycosis did not spend any time in room A of the CTICU or a negative-pressure room.Before the PADOH/CDC on-site investigation had begun, hospital A had closed and deconstructed the CTICU for renovation. A mucormycete genetically unrelated to the patient isolates was recovered from one air sample from room A that hospital A obtained before the renovation work began. Multiple construction and demolition projects were occurring at or near hospitals A and B during the period when this cluster occurred. However, the hospital system reported performing ICRAs for these projects. No common construction-related exposure shared by the 4 patients was identified.Although voriconazole is a commonly used antifungal prophylactic agent among transplant recipients in the United States, it is ineffective against mucormycetes (3). Before the PADOH/CDC investigation, the hospital system changed the antifungal prophylactic agent used for transplant recipients to isavuconazole, a mucormycete-active prophylactic agent.Hospitals A and B are no longer using negative-pressure rooms to house solid organ transplant patients who are without a clinical indication. Caring for immunosuppressed patients in negative-pressure environments has been previously identified as a risk factor for invasive mold infections, possibly related to the potential to concentrate dust and mold spores in these rooms (7). Negative-pressure rooms are recommended for isolation of patients with a suspected or confirmed airborne infectious disease; this investigation highlights how unnecessary placement of immunocompromised patients in negative-pressure rooms could result in net harm and therefore should be avoided.[The full MMWR article, including references, is available at the source URL.]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The CDC MMWR report above describes the final results of an epidemiological investigation into the mucormycosis outbreak in transplant recipients at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center in 2014-2015 that ProMED-mail posted last year (2015) [ProMED-mail post Mucormycosis - USA: (PA) nosocomial 20150919.3657227].Negative pressure rooms are part of airborne infection control precautions, which are used to prevent organisms that remain infectious while suspended in air over long distances (e.g., measles virus, varicella [chickenpox] virus, _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and possibly Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) from spreading out of the patient's room into the surrounding area (<http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/2007IP/2007ip_part3.html>).Patients who require airborne precautions are to be placed is in a single-patient rooms that are equipped with special air handling and ventilation capacity that create a monitored negative pressure relative to the surrounding area and have 12 air exchanges per hour for new construction and renovation or 6 air exchanges per hour for existing facilities. Air from the room is exhausted directly to the outside or recirculated through HEPA filtration before return.Hospital rooms for transplant patients should be well-sealed and have positive pressure relative to the surrounding area (adjoining hallways, toilets, and anterooms), so that infectious airborne particles in the surrounding area will not enter the transplant patient's room (<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/7/2/70-0263_article>). Some recommend HEPA-filter directed airflow so that air enters at one side of the room and is exhausted at the opposite side (<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/7/2/70-0263_article>). - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/240>.]
