Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/swine-flu-h1n2v-reported-in-minnesota-27144/>A human infection with the ""swine flu,"" (novel swine-origin flu, variant H1N2 (H1N2v)) has been reported in the state of Minnesota.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the patient was hospitalized as a result of their illness but has fully recovered. An investigation is ongoing into the source of the patient's infection and to determine whether there are other epidemiologically-linked cases of H1N2v virus infection.Pigs are commonly infected with swine influenza (""variant flu"") viruses that are usually different from human influenza viruses. While rare, influenza can spread from pigs to people and from people to pigs.Swine flu viruses do not normally infect humans. However, sporadic human infections with influenza viruses that normally circulate in swine and not people have occurred. When this happens, these viruses are called ""variant viruses.""In general, the severity of illnesses associated with variant influenza have been similar to seasonal influenza.Influenza symptoms come on quickly in the form of fever, dry cough, sore throat, headache, extreme tiredness, stuffed-up nose, and body aches. Young children and the elderly may not develop fever. These symptoms can be severe and put you in bed for several days.To date, there is no sustained human-to-human transmission of novel swine-origin flu. However, influenza viruses have the capacity to change and it's possible that this virus may become widespread. They are not transmissible by eating properly handled and prepared pork (pig meat) or other products derived from pigs.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Swine flu viruses do not normally infect humans. However, sporadic human infections with influenza viruses that normally circulate in swine and not people have occurred. When this happens, these viruses are called ""variant viruses."" They also can be denoted by adding the letter ""v"" to the end of the virus subtype designation. Human infections with H1N1v, H3N2v and H1N2v viruses have been detected in the United States [<http://www.cdc.gov/flu/swineflu/variant.htm>].As influenza viruses that infect pigs might be different from human influenza viruses, influenza vaccines made against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs. In addition, because pigs are susceptible to avian, human and swine influenza viruses, they potentially may be infected with influenza viruses from different species (e.g., ducks and humans) at the same time. In that case, it is possible for the genes of these viruses to mix and create a new virus that could spread easily from person-to-person. This type of major change in the influenza A viruses is known as antigenic shift, leading to emergence of a novel virus for the human population to which most people may have little or no immune protection. If this new virus causes illness in people and can be transmitted easily from person-to-person, an influenza pandemic can occur. This is what happened in 2009 when an influenza A H1N1 virus with swine, avian and human genes emerged in the spring of 2009 and caused the 1st pandemic in more than 40 years.Three H1N2v cases were reported in Minnesota in 2013, all of them in people who were exposed to pigs at the Minnesota State Fair that year. The viruses were described as the 1st H1N2v isolates known to contain the matrix gene from the 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus. A few other H1N2v cases have been reported in earlier years, including one in Minnesota in 2011 and one in Michigan in 2007. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/354>.]
