Focus Taiwan [edited]<http://focustaiwan.tw/news/asoc/201605170017.aspx>Enterovirus cases in Taiwan increase nearly 30 percent in one week-----------------------------------------------------------------Enterovirus infections in Taiwan have been increasing rapidly since the start of the epidemic season on 1 May [2016], with thousands of people falling ill in a single week, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) said Tue [17 May 2016].According to the CDC, 17 000 patients sought outpatient or emergency treatment at hospitals for enterovirus infection between 8 May and 14 May, an increase of 27.8 percent from the previous week. Last week[9-15 May 2016], 312 classes were suspended at schools nationwide due to enterovirus infections among students, compared with 102 classes the previous week, the CDC said.It said the coxsackie A virus remained the dominant virus strain circulating around the country. A total of 31 cases of enterovirus 71 (EV71) infections have been confirmed so far this year, including 3 with severe complications, according to the CDC. EV71 is a common cause of hand, foot and mouth disease among infants and children and is associated with fatal neurological illness.The CDC had warned earlier of a major EV71 epidemic in Taiwan this year.[Byline: Chang Ming-hsuan, Y.F. Low]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[A strain (C4a) of enterovirus EV71 has infected hundreds of thousands of mostly pre-school-age children in China, Cambodia, and Taiwan in recent years. Most cases initially develop fever and a rash. More serious signs are sudden weakness in the limbs, excessive drowsiness or irritability, or evidence of heart and lung inflammation, such as being out of breath. [But note that the cases reported here are mostly mild. - Mod.LK]Like many viruses, EV71 is transmitted by fecal contact and by coughs and sneezes (droplet infection). Spread from respiratory droplets can be limited by use of tissues and avoiding contact with others. Careful hand hygiene is important. Parents toileting children or changing nappies should be particularly careful to routinely wash their hands with soap and to use disinfectants where needed. Isolation of cases is very effective at limiting spread and children with hand, foot and mouth disease should be kept at home until the blisters have cleared up.Treatment---------There is as yet no vaccine or curative treatment available on the market, but the Chinese company Sinovac has successfully tested a vaccine against EV71 in children. The trial, involving 10 000 children, showed a much lower incidence of hand, foot and mouth disease among the immunized children. Sinovac has applied for permission to market the vaccine.(Excerpted/ edited from <http://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-the-new-enterovirus-or-ev71-14919>)] - Mod. LK******[2] Enterovirus and hepatitis ADate: Wed 18 May 2016Source: Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/taiwan-reports-increases-in-enterovirus-hepatitis-a-infections-15577/>Taiwan reports increases in enterovirus, hepatitis A infections---------------------------------------------------------------The Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (CDC) is reporting increasing numbers of 2 viral diseases-enterovirus and hepatitis A, prompting calls for preventive measures. According to the surveillance data compiled by Taiwan CDC, coxsackie A virus is currently the dominant strains circulating in the community. Cases of enterovirus 71 (EV71) infection have also continued to occur and most of them are mild cases.During the past week, health officials report 17 000 ER and outpatient visits for enterovirus infections, which include 7 additional EV71 cases. Thus far this year, as of 17 May 2016, 31 cases of EV71 infection, including 25 mild cases, 3 suspected severe cases, and 3 severe cases, have been confirmed in Taiwan. Taiwan is not alone as several Asian countries are reporting increases in enterovirus to include China, Vietnam, South Korea, Macau and Singapore.Taiwan CDC reminds that frequent hand washing is the primary way to prevent enterovirus infection. Adults who return home from work are advised to change clothes and wash hands with soap and water before coming into contact with children.In addition, please make sure children wash their hands with soap and water thoroughly when returning home and before having their meals in order to prevent infection. When a child in a household is diagnosed with enterovirus infection, parents and child caregivers are urged to refrain the sick child from close contact with other children to prevent further spread of the disease.Taiwan is also seeing a record number of hepatitis A infections year to date. According to the surveillance data collected by Taiwan CDC, thus far this year, as of 15 May 2016, a total of 275 cases of hepatitis A have been reported in Taiwan, reaching a record high in years. 
