Wicked Local Newton [edited]<http://newton.wickedlocal.com/article/20160518/NEWS/160515605>Newton [Massachusetts] officials said Wednesday [18 May 2016] Burr Elementary School was the only school to test positive for high lead levels in a recent round of tests. The district chose to test all school buildings proactively this year after lead contamination in Flint, Michigan, put a spotlight on the issue. Officials shut off water service to Burr's drinking fountains Tuesday morning [17 May 2016] after samples from a fountain found lead concentrations that were unsafe.According to information provided by Superintendent David Fleishman, one sample tested at 26.6 parts per billion (ppb) and another -- taken after the water ran for 10 minutes -- tested at 34 ppb. The increase in the 2nd test is the opposite of what would be expected, leading to suspicion the tests were mislabeled, according to a fact sheet Fleishman provided Tuesday. Lead concentrations above 15 ppb require action.Results from a 2nd fountain at Burr were not higher than that threshold, according to Dori Zaleznik, the city's chief administrative officer. Burr's water was last tested in 2010 and found to be safe, Zaleznik said. The district usually conducts state-mandated testing on 2 schools per year, but chose to proactively test fountains in all schools around April break this year [2016] because of the issues in Flint, Zaleznik said. Fountains at Burr will remain off until officials can determine what is causing the lead contamination.The school does not have lead pipes, officials said. Water bottles are being provided to students and staff. Zaleznik said additional water samples were taken from all Burr fountains Wednesday.Tests typically take around 2 weeks to process, she said. But Maureen Lemieux, the city's chief financial officer, told councilors Wednesday night the city was pursuing an accelerated testing process. Lemieux said the city suspected the lead was most likely coming from inside the building, possibly from welding or other lead fixtures. The routine testing of 2 school facilities per year has been ongoing for 14 years, according to Zaleznik. Samples are taken from 2 water fountains and a kitchen sink when applicable.Fleishman said the district was not aware of any children showing symptoms of lead poisoning. Last month [April 2016], Boston found high lead levels in 4 of its public schools -- with concentrations ranging from roughly 16 to 32 ppb. One result was as high as 82 ppb. Zaleznik and Fleishman said results from all recent tests would be posted online by week's end. At this time, officials have only received verbal confirmation that no other results were higher than 15 ppb.[Byline: Jonathan Dame]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It seems a wise move to be testing the water with all the recent issues regarding lead in many schools, especially in Michigan.While it initially seems logical to test a couple of fountains and lavatories, it may be wiser to test more than a couple at each location. This may help determine if the fault lies with pipes or other infrastructure. For example, was the water fountain installed years ago or only in the last couple of years? Could this be a problem from years ago, or a more recent issue in the school? Generally a sample taken after the water has been running would be expected to be lower than when 1st turned on. This article states the samples may have been switched. A laboratory is unlikely to make that type of mistake. Therefore the mistake would more likely have been at the time of sampling and the 1st sample was labeled as the 2nd sample. However, it would make me wonder if the source of the lead is something 'eroding' at a faster rate when the water is turned on. Given the highlighting of lead in water and in schools, it would seem more appropriate to be testing every school every year. If the source is lead welds or pipes, or some other source, then knowing this would be the 1st step in correction.Since all schools are not tested every year, one wonders if there are any elevated lead levels in children. Although clinical symptoms are not present, there could be elevated levels that may not be high enough yet to produce signs and symptoms.Lead poisoning occurs when lead builds up in the body, often over a period of months or years. Even small amounts of lead can cause serious health problems. Children under the age of 6 (who are generally too young to be in the schools) are especially vulnerable to lead poisoning, which can severely affect mental and physical development. At very high levels, lead poisoning can be fatal.Lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust in older buildings are the most common sources of lead poisoning in children. Other sources include contaminated air, water and soil. Adults who work with batteries, do home renovations or work in auto repair shops also may be exposed to lead. Portions of this comment were extracted from: <http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/basics/definition/con-20035487>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1220>.]
