Eurosurveillance, Volume 21, Issue 20 [summ., edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22481>Rapid communicationFilia A, et al. Outbreak of a new measles B3 variant in the Roma/Sinti population with transmission in the nosocomial setting, Italy, November 2015 to April 2016. Euro Surveill. 2016;21(20):pii=30235. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.20.30235Abstract--------A measles outbreak occurred from November 2015 to April 2016 in 2 northern Italian regions, affecting the Roma/Sinti ethnic population and nosocomial setting. Overall, 67 cases were reported. Median age of 43 cases in 3 Roma/Sinti camps was 4 years, nosocomial cases were mainly adults. The outbreak was caused by a new measles virus B3.1 variant. Immunisation resources and strategies should be directed at groups with gaps in vaccine coverage, e.g. Roma/Sinti and healthcare workers.Discussion----------This outbreak highlights the immunity gaps existing in Roma/Sinti population groups and HCW [health care workers] in Italy. Both are considered to be hard-to-reach populations and outbreaks have also been reported in Europe and other industrialised countries. [...]The Roma people are a heterogeneous nomadic ethnic group who live in many countries worldwide but primarily in Europe. An estimated 140 000 Roma live in Italy (ca 3400 in Milan). It is difficult to monitor uptake of measles-mumps-rubella vaccine among the Roma, but it is known to be low. In this outbreak, a high level of susceptibility was found among children (median age of cases: 4 years), confirming a low vaccination uptake. Barriers to vaccination among the Roma have been previously described. [...]Despite a thorough investigation, no source of exposure was found for some cases in Parma and Piacenza and phylogenetic analysis was essential to confirm connections among cases. It is likely that not all cases were detected by the surveillance system, the sensitivity of which should be strengthened by raising awareness of measles among physicians and increasing the rate of suspected cases being tested. However, it is known that many measles cases do not seek health care and this may also have affected sensitivity. Some cases were initially misdiagnosed, probably because many clinicians are no longer familiar with the clinical presentation of measles. They need to be reminded to consider measles in the differential diagnosis of any febrile rash illness, especially in unvaccinated persons, and to immediately report suspected case to public health authorities so that control measures can be implemented rapidly. [...]To achieve measles elimination, besides strengthening surveillance and improving vaccination coverage in the general population, immunisation resources and tailored strategies should be directed at Roma communities and HCW. It has been suggested that greater vaccination uptake may be achieved among Roma children by inviting complete households for vaccination and by involving cultural mediators. Also, control measures must be strengthened, including rapid case identification with implementation of airborne precautions in healthcare facilities to avoid nosocomial transmission.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is interesting that ""Since August 2015 and up to April 2016, besides the outbreak cases, the new B3 variant has also been identified in other cases with no epidemiological link to the outbreak. In total, it has been identified in 17 non-Roma cases in various cities in Lombardy and 4 cases in Emilia-Romagna in cities other than Parma and Piacenza. ... Outside of Italy, identical sequences have been identified in Spain, Germany, and the United Kingdom in August to September 2015 (before the described outbreak, weeks 35-39/2015) and in Romania in January 2016 (week 3/2016).""A map of Italy can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/75>. - Mod.LK]
