Radio Dabanga [edited]<https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/article/mercury-cyanide-sold-freely-in-south-kordofan>Ibrahim Nima, chairman of the local committee on environmental protection, reported the selling of the toxic chemicals in Abu Jubaiha [South Kordofan, Sudan] to Radio Dabanga. ""There has been serious environmental damage, such as the death of a large number of cattle in various parts of the locality.""In December l[2015], a Member of Parliament reported the death of livestock in Abu Jubaiha because of the presence of mercury, used for the extraction of gold in the mining areas.""The chemicals are sold openly without any monitoring,"" Nima said in an interview with Radio Dabanga, pointing to the establishment of several labs for mining in the region.The government authorities are aware of the damage these substances may cause, but continue to grant licenses to mining companies in the state, Nima said.""All the people in Marafein, south of Abu Jubaiha, refuse the presence of the new companies."" One of these companies is El Itimad, which was established in the area last week [week of 9 May 2016].The committee on environmental protection has given El Itimad a maximum period of 72 hours to leave the site, according to the chairman. ""We will hold the regional authorities responsible for the consequences, in the event that the company does not respond to our demand.""In August 2015, the Abu Jubaiha Citizens' Committee called on all citizens to oppose the establishment of gold mining companies in the area. Their opposition was sparked by specialists who informed the population about the dangers of mercury and cyanide used in gold mining, one of the committee members explained at the time.Mercury, which is used to refine gold, is a highly poisonous element which can affect the brain, nervous, and reproductive systems if inhaled as vapour. Cyanide has been used by the mining industry to separate gold and silver particles from ore. Both chemicals may cause various serious, possibly fatal health problems. Mercury is considered by the World Health Organization as one of the top 10 chemicals or groups of chemicals of major public health concern.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Both mercury and cyanide can be used to mine other metals and minerals. The combination of these can be detrimental to the people involved.Mercury-------There are 3 forms of mercury: elemental mercury, inorganic mercury, and organic mercury.Elemental mercury is also known as metallic mercury, liquid mercury, liquid silver, and quicksilver, and is an extremely heavy, odorless, silver-colored liquid. Mercury exists as a natural element in the earth's crust. Since this is the most likely form of mercury to which these children were exposed, this comment is confined to the toxicity of elemental mercury. There are several sources of elemental mercury, including broken mercury thermometers, broken fluorescent light bulbs, dental amalgam fillings, mercury-containing latex paints, extraction of gold from ore using mercury, and contaminated clothing from workers in thermometer-making plants. Elemental mercury is also used as a Mexican folk medicine to treat ""empacho,"" a chronic stomach disorder.Elemental mercury is the most commonly swallowed form of mercury, usually from a broken thermometer. Fortunately, elemental mercury is not absorbed from the stomach and will not cause any poisoning in a healthy person. The swallowed mercury is slippery, and will roll into the stomach, out into the bowels, and will be quickly eliminated without causing any symptoms. However, if the person has severe inflammatory bowel disease or a fistula (hole or opening) in their intestine, problems may result if the mercury is not all cleared out, resulting in prolonged exposure.Handling liquid mercury for a very short period of time usually does not result in any problems.  An allergic rash is possible. Mercury is not well-absorbed through the skin, so skin contact is not likely to cause mercury poisoning, especially with a brief one-time exposure. Even if a person has cuts in the skin, mercury is too heavy to be contained by a cut. Merely washing the wound well will remove the mercury.Inhalation of elemental mercury vapors is the main cause of toxicity, as mercury is well absorbed through the lungs. Problems from inhalation result either from a large one-time exposure or a long-term exposure. A small, one-time exposure is not likely to cause problems. The lungs are the primary target organ following a large, one-time inhalation exposure of mercury vapor. Other signs and symptoms may develop as well. Clinical signs develop within a few hours and include chills, metallic taste, mouth sores, swollen gums, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, headache, weakness, confusion, shortness of breath, cough, chest tightness, bronchitis, pneumonia, and kidney damage.Long-term exposure of inhaled vapors is generally more dangerous, with the nervous system being the primary target organ of toxicity. Symptoms may occur within weeks but usually develop insidiously over a period of years. Neurologic symptoms include tremors, headaches, short-term memory loss, incoordination, weakness, loss of appetite, altered sense of taste and smell, numbness and tingling in the hands and feet, insomnia, and excessive sweating. Psychiatric effects are also seen after long-term exposure.Acrodynia is a condition of pain and dusky pink discoloration in the hands and feet, most often seen in children chronically exposed to heavy metals, especially with mercury. Acrodynia can result from repeated exposures to mercury-containing latex paint fumes. Acrodynia is usually seen in younger children. The symptoms include chills, sweating, body rash, irritability, sleeplessness, leg cramps, swelling of the cheeks, nose, hands, and feet, light sensitivity in the eyes, and peeling skin layers on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.People are regularly exposed to all 3 types of mercury, although the organic type is the most likely to cause adverse health effects because of its tendency to build up in the body.Mercury vapor is very dangerous. Symptoms of mercury poisoning are progressive. The 1st stage is paresthesia, distinguished by a tingling or numb sensation in the fingers, toes, and face. Paresthesia may be followed by difficulty walking and speaking, impaired vision and hearing, fatigue, and weakness, headache and trouble concentrating, and tremors. Methods of detoxification or treatment are limited. In this particular case, there may be some environmental cleanup issues.Cyanide-------Cyanide exists in several forms. While it is easy to remember it is a colorless, odorless gas, it is also available in crystalline form as potassium cyanide and sodium cyanide. These are generally the forms that are used in food, as this case appears to be. Consequently, a person may be exposed through inhalation or ingestion or through absorption through the skin on contact.Cyanide is used in manufacturing for making paper, textiles, and plastics. It is also in photographic developing chemicals, which may not be in great demand but are still around. Metallurgy employs cyanide salts for electroplating, metal cleaning, and removing gold from its ore. Cyanide gas is used to exterminate pests in ships and buildings. Cyanide is also found in chemicals, such as acetonitril-based products, which may be used to remove artificial nails, or perhaps polish. Sadly this is sometimes ingested.People exposed to a small amount of cyanide by inhalation, absorption, or ingestion may have some or all of the following symptoms within minutes: rapid breathing, restlessness, dizziness, weakness, headache, nausea and vomiting, and rapid heart rate. Exposure to a large amount of cyanide by any route may cause any of the following symptoms: convulsions, low blood pressure, slow heart rate, loss of consciousness, lung injury, and respiratory failure leading to death.Generally treatment for cyanide poisoning must be given very swiftly, especially after ingestion. Unfortunately specific antidotes and are generally only available at a hospital. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy chambers have proven to be helpful. - Mod.TGMaps of Sudan can be seen at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/States_of_Sudan> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/30888>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
