Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/hand-foot-and-mouth-disease-hong-kong-hits-peak-season-89336/>Hand, foot and mouth disease: Hong Kong hits peak season--------------------------------------------------------Hong Kong issues warning for hygiene and public vigilance as season enters peak period.Hong Kong health officials (CHP) are advising the public to remain vigilant with personal hygiene as the city enters the peak season of hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) and enterovirus 71 (EV71) infection.""The activity of both HFMD and EV71 infection is on the rise. The usual peak season is from May to July, with a possible smaller winter peak from October to December. Schools, institutions and play facilities should observe our guidelines and health advice against outbreaks to better protect young children who are more prone to both diseases,"" a spokesman for the CHP said.The number of institutional HFMD outbreaks increased from 5 (affecting 16 persons) in the week ending 30 Apr [2016] to 30 (124 persons) last week. As of 17 May [2016], 13 (42 persons) had been reported this week. In the past 4 weeks, kindergartens and child care centres (KG/CCCs) reported most outbreaks (63 per cent), followed by secondary schools (20 per cent) and primary schools (17 per cent).As for EV71 infection in 2016, as of 17 May, 3 cases were recorded with no severe cases or deaths. In 2015, 56 cases including 6 with severe complications were filed. Regarding severe pediatric enterovirus infection other than EV71 and poliovirus, 3 cases had been recorded so far this year [2016] while 8 were recorded in 2015, with no deaths in both years.Health officials also note some neighboring areas have also entered the peak season since late April. The Health and Family Planning Commission of Guangdong Province reported 88 366 HFMD cases to date, including 3 deaths, rising 72 per cent from last year [2015]. In Taiwan, according to the Centers for Disease Control, the EV activity is increasing and 17 000 EV consultations were recorded last week, rising 27.8 per cent from the preceding week.""HFMD is common in children and is usually caused by EVs such as Coxsackievirus and EV71. It is clinically characterized by maculopapular rash or vesicular lesions occurring on the palms, soles and other parts of the body such as the buttocks and thighs. Vesicular lesions and ulcers may also be found in the oral cavity. Sometimes patients present mainly with painful ulcers at the back of the mouth, namely herpangina, without rash on the hands or feet,"" a CHP spokesman said.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[To prevent HFMD, members of the public, and especially the management of institutions, should take heed of the following preventive measures:- Maintain good air circulation;- Wash hands before meals and after going to the toilet or handling diapers or other stool-soiled materials;- Keep hands clean and wash hands properly, especially when they are dirtied by respiratory secretions, such as after sneezing;- Cover the nose and mouth while sneezing or coughing and dispose of nasal and oral discharges properly;- Clean children's toys and other objects thoroughly and frequently with diluted household bleach (by adding one part of household bleach containing 5.25 per cent sodium hypochlorite to 49 parts of water), followed by rinsing or wiping with clean water;- Children who are ill should be kept out of school until their fever and rash have subsided and all the vesicles have dried and crusted;- Avoid going to overcrowded places; and- Parents should maintain close communication with schools to let them know the latest situation of the sick children.Read the CHP's page on HFMD and EV71 infection (<http://www.chp.gov.hk/en/view_content/16354.html>) for more information. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/198>.]
