El Pais [in Spanish, trans. Susana Urra, edited]<http://elpais.com/elpais/2016/05/20/inenglish/1463732719_125010.html>An outbreak of an enterovirus that can cause severe illness has already affected 60 children in Catalonia, according to the most recent figures released by the regional health department. Of these, 29 were hospitalized after suffering a form of encephalitis, which causes inflammation of the brain stem and cerebellum. Health authorities said most of the children are recovering well, although 2 remain in a serious condition.Similar outbreaks have been reported in Bulgaria, the United States and several Asian countries, but this is the 1st time Spain has experienced so many cases at the same time. It's behaving differently from what we usually see, and it is hard to know what to expect, said Carles Rodrigo, Vall d'Hebron Hospital chief of pediatrics.Enteroviruses are common at this time of the year and normally produce mild symptoms similar to the common cold or flu. But preliminary lab results for this particular outbreak suggest the presence of a more aggressive subtype affecting the central nervous system.Two days after issuing an alert, Catalan health authorities said that 21 children had been treated at regional hospitals for related symptoms. There is no known vaccine or prescription drug against the microorganism.The 1st severe case of enterovirus was reported in February [2016], when a 3 year old child suffered a myelitis -- an inflammation of the spinal cord -- that has left her quadraplegic. But doctors said that she was infected by a different, even more virulent enterovirus called EV-D68, which can cause paralysis similar to poliomyelitis.Experts have ruled out the presence of EV-D68 in all 48 cases reported since 13 Apr 2016, when the 1st case arrived at the emergency room of Vall d'Hebron Hospital in Barcelona. That child, who went into cardiac arrest, remains in hospital with ""serious effects"", according to Carles Rodrigo, head of pediatrics at the hospital. Most of the other cases were reported in May [2016].Another child in the Catalan province of Tarragona has died with similar symptoms to those produced by enteroviruses, but health authorities have not included him in the present outbreak. ""Although clinically he would be part of the group, we have been unable to detect the enterovirus in his samples. It is a probable case, but we are not certain,"" said Josep MarÌ a Argimon, deputy director of the Catalan health services, CatSalut.Faced with an avalanche of concerned parents, doctors are underscoring that most cases of enterovirus infection are benign. ""The vast majority recover well,"" said Rodrigo, noting that if the child has trouble breathing, swallowing or talking, along with a fever, parents should go see the doctor.Experts say it is difficult to foresee what will happen next. ""It's behaving differently from what we usually see, and it is hard to know what to expect. We cannot predict how many more cases will emerge in future,"" said Rodrigo.[byline: Jessica Mouzo QuintÌÁns]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[About 9 per cent of cases of acute focal encephalitis may be due to enteroviruses (the majority being due to herpes virus). Enteroviruses have a worldwide distribution, but recent outbreaks of EV71 have been centered in Asia, particularly East and South East Asia. Enterovirus 71 is not the only enterovirus that involves the central nervous system (CNS). In a Canadian survey of enteroviral infections of the CNS from 1973 to 1981, coxsackievirus A9, B1, B2, B3 and B5, echoviruses type 6, 7, 9, 11, 30, and poliovirus type 2 were isolated as well. The incidence of encephalitis specifically in enterovirus infections is reported to be at 3%, with the majority presenting meningitis.Clinically evident infection occurs mainly in children, with few cases reported in adults. There is a male preponderance. In children, the infection usually presents as hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD). Yet from the late 1990s onwards, increasingly severe cases caused by enterovirus have been documented, particularly involving EV71.The incidence of CNS complications in enterovirus infection has been reported to range from 2-10 per cent. Even so, according to a prospective study of 773 children and retrospective study of 423 patients, it can go as high as to 19-42 per cent, respectively. Of the 773 children, EV71 was isolated in 277 (41 per cent), and out of the 277 children, a further 28 had coinfections with a 2nd virus (other enteroviruses, adenovirus and unidentified virus). Coxsackie A virus was isolated in 85 patients, and out of these, 4 had coinfections as well. Other enteroviruses, adenoviruses or unidentified viruses were isolated in 58. While coinfections with other enteroviruses did not appear to increase the risk of neurological complications, an association was found between patients who were coinfected with dengue viruses and neurological symptoms. Similarly, in the retrospective study of 423 patients, those with CNS involvement were more likely to have EV71 (21 per cent) instead of coxsackie A virus infection (16 per cent). In addition, rate of disease progression and severity was reported to be greater in EV71 infection [From: <http://www.intechopen.com/books/encephalitis/viral-encephalitis-with-focus-on-human-enteroviruses>].Catalonia is an autonomous community of Spain located on the northeastern extremity of the Iberian Peninsula. A map of Catalonia is available at <http://binged.it/1s81avH>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1341>.]
