Water Online [edited]<http://www.wateronline.com/doc/long-island-schools-test-positive-for-lead-0001>Following the Flint, Michigan lead contamination crisis, more than a half-dozen school districts on Long Island, NY have tested positive for elevated lead levels in water from drinking fountains and sinks. Few schools had thought to test their water until Newark, NJ school officials announced in March 2016 that they had found high levels of lead in drinking water.According to WYNC News, the school districts where drinking water has shown elevated lead levels include Valley Stream Central High School, Bayport Blue-Point, Port Washington, Elwood, Northport and East Northport, and Valley Stream 13. ""The health and safety of our students and staff remains our highest priority. We will continue to update the community as additional testing is conducted and work is completed,"" Northport-East Northport schools superintendent Robert Banzer said in a letter to parents, according to NBC New York.At least 32 of the schools have initiated a testing plan, but many are on a wait list because there are not enough water engineers to go around.Representatives from the affected Long Island school districts say they believe the elevated levels are caused by the plumbing inside drinking fountains and that they are moving to fix or replace the equipment entirely, WYNC News reported.Some of the sources that tested positive for elevated lead levels included water fountains currently in use; others came from sinks and fountains that weren't being used for drinking. [If high lead levels came from sinks and fountains not being used for drinking, then there must be another source of lead, as this does not have the same plumbing as the fountain, but it may have the same pipes. - Mod.TG]In Syosset, NY, NBC New York reported that a total of 5 fountains, 3 at Bayliss Elementary School and 2 at Robbins Lane Elementary, have already tested positive for elevated lead. The school district said that while they determine what to do, they've shut off fountains and installed refrigerated water coolers.Syosset officials said the town normally tests water sources for copper and lead every 3 years and that its schools weren't due for testing for another year. They decided to begin testing earlier than normal. ""Our testing is not yet complete, but we will inform the public of any additional findings. Meanwhile, we will also work to identify the source of the current contamination,"" the district said in a letter to parents.To read more about lead contamination, visit Water Online's Drinking Water Contaminant Removal Solutions Center.[byline: Peak Johnson]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It seems a wise move to be testing the water with all the recent issues regarding lead in many schools, especially in Michigan. All schools and municipalities should be testing their water.While it initially seems logical to test a couple of fountains and lavatories, it may be wiser to test more than a couple at each location. This may help determine whether the fault lies with pipes or other infrastructure. For example, was the water fountain installed years ago or only in the last couple of years? Could this be a problem from years ago, or a more recent issue in the school?Lead poisoning occurs when lead builds up in the body, often over a period of months or years. Even small amounts of lead can cause serious health problems. Children under the age of 6 (who are generally too young to be in the schools) are especially vulnerable to lead poisoning, which can severely affect mental and physical development. At very high levels, lead poisoning can be fatal.Lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust in older buildings are the commonest sources of lead poisoning in children. Other sources include contaminated air, water and soil. Adults who work with batteries, do home renovations or work in auto repair shops also may be exposed to lead.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/basics/definition/con-20035487>. - Mod.TG]
