WHO situation report, yellow fever [edited]<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/207328/1/yellowfeversitrep_26May2016_eng.pdf?ua=1>Summary-------A yellow fever outbreak was detected in Luanda, Angola late in December 2015. The 1st cases were confirmed by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa on 19 Jan 2016 and by the Institut Pasteur Dakar (IP-D) on 20 Jan [2016]. Subsequently, a rapid increase in the number of cases has been observed.As of 25 May 2016, Angola has reported 2536 suspected cases of yellow fever with 301 deaths. Among those cases, 747 have been laboratory confirmed. Despite vaccination campaigns in Luanda, Huambo and Benguela provinces, circulation of the virus persists in some districts. Vaccination campaigns started on 16 May in Cuanza Sul, Huila and Uige provinces. Lunda Norte has reported, for the 1st time since the beginning of the outbreak, 5 autochthonous laboratory confirmed cases in 2 districts.3 countries have reported confirmed yellow fever cases imported from Angola: Democratic Republic of The Congo (DRC) (41 cases), Kenya (2 cases) and People's Republic of China (11 cases). This highlights the risk of international spread through non- immunised travellers.On 22 Mar 2016, the Ministry of Health of DRC confirmed cases of yellow fever in connection with Angola. The government officially declared the yellow fever outbreak on 23 Apr [2016]. As of 25 May [2016], DRC has reported 3 probable cases and 48 laboratory confirmed cases: 41 of those are imported from Angola, reported in Kongo Central, Kinshasa and Kwango (formerly Bandundu) provinces, 2 are autochthonous cases in Ndjili, Kinshasa and in Matadi, Kongo Central provinces. The possibility of locally acquired infection is under investigation for at least 3 non-classified cases in both Kongo Central (Muanda district) and Kwango provinces.In Uganda, the Ministry of Health notified yellow fever cases in Masaka district on 9 Apr 2016. As of 25 May [2016], 60 suspected cases, of which 7 are laboratory confirmed, have been reported from 3 districts: Masaka, Rukungiri and Kalangala. According to sequencing results, those clusters are not epidemiologically linked to Angola.The virus in Angola and DRC is largely concentrated in main cities. The risk of spread and local transmission to other provinces in Angola, DRC and Uganda remains a serious concern. There is also a high risk of potential spread to bordering countries especially those previously classified as low-risk for yellow fever disease (that is, Namibia, Zambia) and where the population, travellers and foreign workers are not vaccinated against yellow fever.An Emergency Committee (EC) regarding yellow fever was convened by WHO's director-general under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) on 19 May 2016. Following the advice of the EC, the director-general decided that the urban yellow fever outbreaks in Angola and DRC are serious public health events which warrant intensified national action and enhanced international support. The events do not at this time constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). The statement can be found on the WHO website.Surveillance------------AngolaFrom 5 Dec 2015 to 25 May 2016, the Ministry of Health has reported a total of 2536 suspected cases with 301 deaths and 747 laboratory confirmed cases. There are confirmed cases in 15 of the 18 provinces and suspected cases are present in all provinces. Local transmission is present in 7 provinces, in 223 districts. About 62 per cent of these cases are reported in Luanda province.Despite a decreasing trend, the outbreak in Angola remains of high concern due to persistent local transmission in Luanda. Although vaccination efforts have reached about 8 million people, local transmission has been reported in 7 provinces (urban areas and main ports) and there is a high risk of spread to neighbouring countries.For the 1st time, since the beginning of the outbreak, districts in Lunda Norte province report confirmed cases with local transmission: 4 cases in the district of Coango and one case was notified in Chitato district. These areas have an intense commercial and transit of people and goods across DRC border due to economic activities, such as diamond mining. The risk of spread to other provinces, such as Lunda Sul (city of Saurimo) and Malanje, is also very high due to these economic activities.The risk of establishment of local transmission in other provinces where no autochthonous cases are reported is high. DRC has reported cases imported from 2 provinces in Angola where no local transmission is currently reported (Cabinda and Zaire). Cabinda is an exclave and province of Angola and is separated from the rest of Angola by a narrow strip of territory belonging to the DRC and bounded on the north by the Republic of the Congo. This poses also a further risk of transmission in DRC and Republic of the Congo.Democratic Republic of The CongoOn 22 Mar 2016, the Ministry of Health of DRC, notified human cases of yellow fever in connection with Angola. The yellow fever outbreak was officially declared on 23 Apr [2016].As of 25 May [2016], DRC has reported 3 probable cases and 48 laboratory confirmed cases: 41 of those are imported from Angola, reported in Kongo Central, Kinshasa and Kwango provinces, 2 are autochthonous cases in Ndjili, Kinshasa and in Matadi, Kongo Central provinces.The possibility of locally acquired infections is under investigation for at least 3 non-classified cases in both Kongo Central (Muanda district) and Kwango provinces.The possibility of locally acquired infections is under investigation for at least 3 non-classified cases in both Kongo Central and Kwango provinces.For 3 probable cases results are still pending at IP-D.Given the large Angolan community in Kinshasa, the presence and activity of the aedes mosquito and population movements within the country, the potential risk of local transmission in DRC in general and in the whole of Kinshasa in particular, is high. The situation needs to be closely monitored.UgandaOn 9 Apr 2016, Uganda notified WHO of yellow fever cases in the south western district of Masaka. As of 25 May [2016], 60 suspected cases of yellow fever have been reported in 7 districts. Of those, 7 cases have been laboratory confirmed (5 in Masaka, one in Rukungiri and one in Kalangala).Uganda is experiencing local transmission of yellow fever outbreak. According to sequencing results, the outbreak is not linked to Angola and indicates high similarities with the virus which caused the outbreak in Uganda in 2010.Other countriesNo suspected cases of yellow fever have been reported in the Republic of the Congo or Zambia. However, Namibia and Zambia share a long and porous border with Angola and controlling population movement between the 3 countries will be challenging.Confirmed yellow fever cases exported from Angola has also been documented in Kenya (2 cases) and People's Republic of China (11 cases). This highlights the risk of international spread through non-immunised travellers.Risk assessment---------------The outbreak in Angola remains of high concern due to:- persistent local transmission in Luanda despite the fact that more than 7 million people have been vaccinated;- local transmission has been reported in 7 highly populated provinces including Luanda. Luanda Norte is the province that most recently reported yellow fever transmission;- the continued extension of the outbreak to new provinces and new districts;- high risk of spread to neighbouring countries. As the borders are porous with substantial crossborder social and economic activities, further transmission cannot be excluded. Viraemic travelling patients pose a risk for the establishment of local transmission especially in countries where adequate vectors and susceptible human populations are present;- inadequate surveillance system capable of identifying new foci or areas of cases emerging;- high index of suspicion of ongoing transmission in areas hard to reach like Cabinda.For DRC, a field investigation conducted in April [2016] concluded that there is a high risk of local transmission of yellow fever in the country. The outbreak has already spread to 3 provinces. Given the limited availability of vaccines, the large Angolan community in Kinshasa, the porous border between Angola and DRC, and the presence and the activity of the vector aedes in the country, the situation needs to be closely monitored.The virus in Angola and DRC is largely concentrated in main cities. The risk of spread and local transmission in other provinces in the 3 countries remains a serious concern. The risk is high also for potential spread to bordering countries especially those classified as low-risk (that is, Namibia, Zambia) and where the population, travelers and foreign workers are not vaccinated for yellow fever.Uganda and some countries in South America (Brazil and Peru) are facing yellow fever outbreaks or sporadic cases of yellow fever. Those events are not related to the Angolan outbreak but there are needs for vaccines in those countries in a context of limited yellow fever vaccines stockpile.Response--------An Emergency Committee (EC) regarding yellow fever was convened by WHO's director-general under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) on 19 May 2016. Following advice from the EC, the director-general decided that the urban yellow fever outbreaks in Angola and DRC are serious public health events which warrant intensified national action and enhanced international support. The events do not at this time constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). The director-general provided the following advice to member states:- the acceleration of surveillance, mass vaccination, risk communications, community mobilization, vector control and case management measures in Angola and DRC;- the assurance of yellow fever vaccination of all travellers, and especially migrant workers, to and from Angola and DRC;- the intensification of surveillance and preparedness activities, including verification of yellow fever vaccination in travellers and risk communications, in at-risk countries and countries having borders with the affected countries.Vaccinations campaigns started 1st in Luanda province at the beginning of February, and mid-April [2016] in Benguela and Huambo.As of 18 May [2016], 11.7 million doses were shipped to Angola.DRC and Uganda are GAVI Alliance eligible countries thus the vaccination campaigns in these countries will be covered by GAVI Alliance.2.2 million vaccines and ancillaries have arrived in DRC. The emergency vaccination campaign targeting 7 health zones (zones de sant̩) in Kongo central province and N'djili health zone in Kinshasa province started on 26 May [2016].700 000 yellow fever vaccines arrived in Uganda and the vaccination campaign started on 19 May [2016]. The coverage from the reports submitted to date stands at 88 per cent for Masaka and 96.8 per cent for Rukungiri. Kalangala will start vaccination campaigns next week.Namibia requested 450 000 doses (10 dose vials) for yellow fever vaccine for travellers and refugees. Zambia has also requested 50 000 doses for yellow fever vaccine for travellers.There has been an increase in media attention on yellow fever, in particular on vaccine supply, travel advice and the convening of the Emergency Committee.A press conference was held immediately following the Emergency Committee on yellow fever on 19 May [2016]. The statement can be found on the WHO website.Q&As on the current outbreak continue to be updated on the WHO website.WHO briefs UN partners on communications issues related to the outbreak on a weekly basis and shares resources for a joint coordinated response.Coordination calls are being held twice weekly between the WHO communications team in Geneva and Regional communications leadership.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmil.org>[Continuation of transmission in Angola and its spread there are serious concern. The risk of spread to other countries with initiation of outbreaks is real. Countries having populations of susceptible people and mosquito vectors would be well advised to intensify surveillance at their borders and internally and have contingency plans in place to assure rapid response.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the locations of the African countries mentioned can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3948>. - Mod.TY]******[2] Risk of spreadDate: Thu 26 May 2016Source: The News Hub [edited]<https://www.the-newshub.com/international/yellow-fever-in-angola-a-global-threat>Approximately 2149 suspected and confirmed cases have been reported in Angola, including 277 deaths (WHO [now 301 fatalities - Mod.TY]). The outbreak of yellow fever in Angola poses a threat to the entire world, particularly Asia. There are about 100 000 Chinese migrant workers in Angola who could potentially carry the virus home [now 11 returned, infected Chinese - Mod.TY]. Immunisation against yellow fever is practically non-existent in China and 6 [11] unvaccinated workers from China returned from Angola with the virus. Asia is yet to experience a major outbreak of yellow fever, but expanding migration and globalisation make the continent highly susceptible to an epidemic.If we don't want to virus to spread, we must reach the countries where people are not vaccinated against yellow fever. We need rapid mobilisation to contain the outbreak in Angola. Increasing links between China and the African continent pose a risk to Asia, where yellow fever is virtually non-existent. The UN and WHO have already shipped 9 million doses of vaccine to Angola, but that is only enough for about a 3rd of the population. Stocks are rapidly running out as health officials attempt to contain the outbreak in Angola. Drop in oil prices is also damaging Angola's ability to combat the virus and treat the sick; the health service is free and funded entirely by the state, but the state budget depends entirely on oil. Declining oil prices correlates with a declining social welfare system. Containing the virus and preventing deaths will be even more of a challenge.Globalisation has meant that people are travelling more than ever, enhancing their ability of picking up a virus and bringing it home. There are numerous reasons for strict border control as more people are migrating for a better quality of life and employment opportunities, but potential health risks are an important factor. The WHO stated that the recent outbreak in urban areas of Democratic Republic of Congo highlights the threat of international spread, especially to Namibia and Zambia where their populations aren't usually vaccinated against yellow fever. An epidemic has the potential to wipe out the majority of a healthy, working population who create the foundation for economic growth and development. China is emerging as a huge economic superpower with the world's largest population, predicted to account for 25.6 per cent of global output by 2020. 54 per cent of the total population live in urban areas; yellow fever is easily spread among urban areas with large, overcrowded populations.How is it going to spread to China's urban population? Migration and trade. China has an increasingly important position in Africa -- there is a rising demand from China for Africa's commodities and emerging economies are becoming more dependent on Africa for their imports. Nigeria, Algeria and Angola are the key oil exporters. China is a key aid donor and provides many concessional loans to African countries -- China's presence in Africa is growing and showing few signs of slowing down. Stronger economic ties means more migration.If yellow fever spreads through China, it has the potential to reach other parts of Asia. A new challenge for China may be to limit migration to parts of Africa or enhance border control to check for serious health risks. Special attention must be placed on returning migrants from Angola and other potentially endemic areas. Although the risk of establishment of a local cycle of transmission in China is minor due to the current climatic condition, if it starts to spread rapidly from person-to-person it may become a major risk. Climate change experts have also suggested global warming as a cause of outbreaks of yellow fever in unusual destinations; mosquitoes can now survive in conditions where they could not survive several decades ago. The WHO must figure out a way to stretch supplies before it spreads beyond Africa and parts of Asia. A healthy, working population is vital to economic growth, reducing poverty and enhancing development; prioritising health, whether it be through restrictive migration and trade, should be a top priority for middle-income and emerging economies across the south.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Outbreaks do not occur as isolated events. They occur in the context of social, economic and environmental factors, as illustrated in the above report. That context is dynamic, not static, requiring that health authorities proactively adapt plans to the realities of the day. - Mod.TY]
