WHO Situation Report [edited]<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/208818/1/yellowfeversitrep_2Jun2016_eng.pdf>Summary-------A yellow fever outbreak was detected in Luanda, Angola late in December 2015. The 1st cases were confirmed by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa on 19 Jan 2016 and by the Institut Pasteur Dakar (IP-D) on 20 Jan [2016]. Subsequently, a rapid increase in the number of cases has been observed.As of 1 Jun 2016, Angola has reported 2893 suspected cases of yellow fever with 325 deaths. Among those cases, 788 have been laboratory confirmed. Despite extensive vaccination campaigns in several povinces, circulation of the virus persists.Cunene and Malanje provinces have reported, for the1st time since the beginning of the outbreak, 5 autochthonous cases.On 22 Mar 2016, the Ministry of Health of DRC confirmed cases of yellow fever in connection with Angola. The government officially declared the yellow fever outbreak on 23 Apr [2016]. As of 1 Jun [2016], DRC has reported 3 probable cases and 52 laboratory confirmed cases: 44 of those are imported from Angola, reported in Kongo Central, Kinshasa, and Kwango (formerly Bandundu) provinces, 2 are sylvatic cases in Northern provinces, and 2 other autochthonous cases in Ndjili (Kinshasa) and in Matadi (Kongo Central). The possibility of locally acquired infection is under investigation for at least 4 non-classified cases.In Uganda, the Ministry of Health notified yellow fever cases in Masaka district on 9 Apr 2016. As of 1 Jun [2016], 68 suspected cases, of which 3 are probable and 7 are laboratory confirmed, have been reported from 3 districts: Masaka, Rukungiri, and Kalangala. According to sequencing results, those clusters are not epidemiologically linked to Angola.The virus in Angola and DRC is largely concentrated in main cities; however there is a high risk of spread and local transmission to other provinces in both countries. There is also a high risk of potential spread to bordering countries especially those previously classified as low-risk for yellow fever disease (that is, Namibia, Zambia) and where the population, travellers and foreign workers are not vaccinated against yellow fever.To date, 3 countries have reported confirmed yellow fever cases imported from Angola: Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) (44 cases), Kenya (2 cases), and People's Republic of China (11 cases). This highlights the risk of international spread through non- immunised travellers.A further 3 countries have reported suspected cases of yellow fever: Republic of Congo (one case), SÌ£o TomÌ© and PrÌ ncipe (2 cases), and Ethiopia (22 cases). Investigations are ongoing to identify the vaccination status of the cases and determine if they are linked with Angola.Following the advice of the Emergency Committee (EC) convened on 19 May 2016, WHO Director-General decided that urban yellow fever outbreaks in Angola and DRC are serious public health events which warrant intensified national action and enhanced international support. The events do not at this time constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). The statement can be found on the WHO website.Surveillance------------AngolaFrom 5 Dec 2015 to 1 Jun 2016, the Ministry of Health has reported a total of 2893 suspected cases with 325 deaths and 788 laboratory confirmed cases. There are confirmed cases in 16 of the 18 provinces and suspected cases are present in all provinces. Local transmission is present in 10 provinces, in 30 districts. Approximately 42 percent of these cases are reported in Luanda province.The outbreak in Angola remains of high concern due to persistent local transmission in Luanda. Although vaccination efforts have reached about 8 million people, local transmission has been reported in 10 provinces, mainly concentrated in urban areas and main ports.2 new provinces have reported local transmission: Cunene province has reported 4 confirmed cases (one in Cahama and 3 in Cuanhama districts) and Malange province (Cacuso district) has reported one confirmed case.Investigation teams have been sent to Kwanza Norte and Cabinda to document the cases and explore potential local transmission.The epidemiological situation in Lunda Norte is of concern. After reports of a cluster of cases in Lunda Norte on 22 May [2016], and given the sensitivity of the area surveillance has been strengthened in the province.Democratic Republic of the CongoOn 22 Mar 2016, the Ministry of Health of DRC, notified human cases of yellow fever in connection with Angola. The yellow fever outbreak was officially declared on 23 Apr [2016].As of 1 Jun [2016], DRC has reported 52 laboratory confirmed cases: 44 of those are imported from Angola, reported in Kongo Central, Kinshasa, and Kwango provinces, 2 are autochthonous cases in Ndjili (Kinshasa) and in Matadi, (Kongo Central) and 2 are sylvatic cases in Northern states. The possibility of locally acquired infections is under investigation for at least 3 non-classified cases in both Kongo Central and Kwango provinces.In addition, the 3 probable cases results are pending confirmation from IP-D.DRC has reported cases imported from 2 provinces in Angola where no local transmission is currently reported (Cabinda and Zaire).On 26 May [2016] at least 11 deaths have been reported among the Congolese community in Angola and 3 confirmed cases, imported from Lunda Norte, have been reported in Kwango province. This area has an intense commercial and transit of people and goods across DRC/Angola border due to economic activities, such as diamond mining with legal and illegal workers. The outbreak might extend to other provinces in particular Kasai, Kasai Central and Lualaba.UgandaOn 9 Apr 2016, Uganda notified WHO of yellow fever cases in the south-western district of Masaka. As of 1 Jun [2016], 68 suspected cases of yellow fever have been reported in 7 districts. Of those, 7 cases have been laboratory confirmed (5 in Masaka, one in Rukungiri, and one in Kalangala).Uganda is experiencing local transmission of yellow fever outbreak. According to sequencing results, the outbreak is not linked to Angola and indicates high similarities with the virus which caused the outbreak in Uganda in 2010.Other countriesRepublic of Congo has reported one case of yellow fever in Bouenza department, bordering Cabinda province (Angola) and DRC. Although initially classified as confirmed, this case requires further investigation to assess whether it is a confirmed case, its vaccination status and whether the case is autochthonous or imported.Ethiopia has reported 22 suspected cases of yellow fever, including 5 deaths in 2 districts of South Omo zone. An investigation is ongoing to determine vaccination status of the cases, history of travel or potential link with Uganda or Angola. Last outbreak of yellow fever in this area was in 2013.SÌ£o TomÌ© and PrÌ ncipe has reported 2 suspected yellow fever cases imported from Luanda, Angola. Investigation is ongoing to determine if the cases were effectively vaccinated against yellow fever.No suspected cases of yellow fever have been reported in Zambia or Namibia. However, they share a long and porous border with Angola and controlling population movement between the 3 countries is challenging.Confirmed yellow fever cases exported from Angola has also been documented in Kenya (2 cases) and People's Republic of China (11 cases). This highlights the risk of international spread through non-immunised travellers.Risk assessment---------------The outbreak in Angola remains of high concern due to:- Persistent local transmission in Luanda despite the fact that approximately 8 million people have been vaccinated.- Local transmission has been reported in 10 highly populated provinces including Luanda. Luanda Norte, Cunene, and Malenge are the provinces that most recently reported local yellow fever transmission.- The continued extension of the outbreak to new provinces and new districts.- High risk of spread to neighbouring countries. As the borders are porous with substantial cross border social and economic activities, further transmission cannot be excluded. Viraemic travelling patients pose a risk for the establishment of local transmission especially in countries where adequate vectors and susceptible human populations are present.- Risk of establishment of local transmission in other provinces where no autochthonous cases are reported.- High index of suspicion of ongoing transmission in hard-to-reach areas like Cabinda.- Inadequate surveillance system capable of identifying new foci or areas of cases emerging.For DRC, a field investigation conducted in April [2016] concluded that there is a high risk of local transmission of yellow fever in the country. The outbreak has already spread to 3 provinces. Given the limited availability of vaccines, the large Angolan community in Kinshasa, the porous border between Angola and DRC, and the presence and the activity of the vector _Aedes_ in the country, the situation needs to be closely monitored. The outbreak might extend to other provinces in particular Kasai, Kasai Central and Lualaba.The virus in Angola and DRC is largely concentrated in main cities. The risk of spread and local transmission in other provinces in the 3 countries remains a serious concern. The risk is high also for potential spread to bordering countries especially those classified as low-risk (i.e. Namibia, Zambia) and where the population, travelers and foreign workers are not vaccinated for yellow fever.Uganda and some countries in South America (Brazil and Peru) are facing yellow fever outbreaks or sporadic cases of yellow fever. Those events are not related to the Angolan outbreak but there are needs for vaccines in those countries in a context of limited yellow fever vaccines stockpile.Response--------An Emergency Committee (EC) regarding yellow fever was convened by WHO's Director-General under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) on 19 May 2016. Following advice from the EC, the Director-General decided that the urban yellow fever outbreaks in Angola and DRC are serious public health events which warrant intensified national action and enhanced international support. The events do not at this time constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).The Director-General provided the following advice to Member States:- the acceleration of surveillance, mass vaccination, risk communications, community mobilization, vector control, and case management measures in Angola and DRC;- the assurance of yellow fever vaccination of all travellers, and especially migrant workers, to and from Angola and DRC;- the intensification of surveillance and preparedness activities, including verification of yellow fever vaccination in travellers and risk communications, in at-risk countries and countries having borders with the affected countries.In Angola, vaccination campaigns started 1st in Luanda province at the beginning of February [2016], and mid-April [2016] in Benguela and Huambo, and on 16 May [2016] in Cuanza Sul, Huila and Uige provinces (Fig. 4). Vaccination campaigns have also started in Cuango district and are planned in Chitato district (Lunda Norte).As of 18 May [2016], 11.7 million doses have been shipped to Angola.DRC and Uganda are GAVI Alliance eligible countries thus the vaccination campaigns in these countries will be covered by GAVI Alliance.2.2 million vaccines and ancillaries have arrived in DRC. The vaccination campaign started on 26 May [2016] and is planned in 11 Health Zones.700 000 yellow fever vaccines arrived in Uganda and the vaccination campaign started on 19 May [2016]. The coverage from the reports submitted to date stands at 88 percent for Masaka and 96.8 percent for Rukungiri.Namibia requested 450 000 doses (10 dose vials) for yellow fever vaccine for travellers and refugees. Zambia has also requested request 50 000 doses for yellow fever vaccine for travellers.There has been an increase in media attention on yellow fever, in particular on vaccine supply, travel advice and the convening of the Emergency Committee.A press conference was held immediately following the Emergency Committee on yellow fever on 19 May [2016]. The statement can be found on the WHO website.Information on the current outbreak continues to be updated on the WHO website.WHO briefs UN partners on communications issues related to the outbreak on a weekly basis and shares resources for a joint coordinated response.Coordination calls are being held twice weekly between the WHO communications team in Geneva and regional communications leadership.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[As the WHO report above indicates, there is cause for real concern in Angola, the Congo DR, and Uganda because new cases continue to appear, some in new areas. There is no indication if the suspected cases in Ethiopia have travel histories to any of the countries where transmission is occurring currently, or if this represents a new outbreak should the cases be confirmed. The inadequate supply of vaccine for the areas targeted in the Congo DR is worrisome. If the 20 million doses are not going to be available soon, extending coverage by administration of reduced doses is an alternative to running out. Administration of 1/5 the normal dose would cover 10 million people and a 1/10 dose would cover the targeted 20 million people. Because the vaccine is a live, attenuated one, reduced volume doses would be expected to be effective.A 3 Jun 2016 report indicates local fear of YF cases in Mandera County in northeastern Kenya. No case numbers are given, nor is it clear if there are suspected cases present there, or just concern about YF crossing the border from neighboring Ethiopia (<http://www.hivisasa.com/garissa/health/144759>). The 2 previously reported YF cases in Kenya were imported from Angola.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the locations of the African countries mentioned can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3948>.A map of Angola can be seen at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/angola.pdf> and of the Congo DR at <https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/files/2015/06/Decentralized-provinces-of-the-DRC-CDRC_DG002_122.jpg>. - Mod.TY]******[2] Congo DR: vaccine shortageDate: Wed 1 Jun 2016Source: Uganda Radio Network (URN) [full report available by subscription and fee; edited]<http://ugandaradionetwork.com/story/drc-hit-by-shortage-of-yellow-fever-vaccine->DRC Health Minister Dr Felix Kabange Numbi Mukwampa says the country does not have enough vaccines to cover the targeted population and areas as part of a vaccination drive launched at the end of last week. Dr Kabange says that the country only received 2 million doses of the vaccine -- far below the over 20 million needed.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] WHO on Congo DRDate: Thu 2 Jun 2016Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/02-june-2016-yellow-fever-drc/en/>Yellow fever -- Democratic Republic of the Congo------------------------------------------------On 22 Mar 2016, the National IHR Focal Point of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) notified WHO of cases of yellow fever (YF) in connection with an ongoing outbreak in Angola (see DON posted on 13 Apr 2016).As of 31 May [2016], a total of 700 suspected cases, including 63 deaths, had been reported from all the provinces by the national surveillance system. Samples were collected from 689 cases and sent for laboratory confirmation to the National Institute of Biomedical Research (INRB) in Kinshasa and the Pasteur Institute (IP) in Dakar, Senegal. To date, a total of 52 cases have been laboratory-confirmed for YF.The 52 confirmed cases are from 5 provinces: Kongo Central (36 cases), Kinshasa (11 cases), Kwango (3 cases), Bas UÌ©lÌ© (1 case), and Tshuapa (1 case). The 2 cases from Bas UÌ©lÌ© and Tshuapa are sylvatic and not related to the outbreak in Angola. 2 of the 52 confirmed cases were classified as autochthonous and were reported from the provinces of Kinshasa and Kongo Central. The remaining 46 confirmed cases were classified as imported from Angola and were detected in the provinces of Kongo Central (34 cases), Kinshasa (9 cases) and Kwango (3 cases).Public health response----------------------In response to the outbreak, a national coordination committee has been activated. This will include 5 sub-committees for reactive vaccination, surveillance and laboratory, vector control, social mobilization, and case management.Suspected cases of YF continue to be investigated on a daily basis. On 12 May, with the support of IP Dakar, national authorities set up a mobile laboratory in DRC to accelerate case confirmation. On 26 May, a reactive campaign vaccination began with a target of 1 983 597 people from 9 health zones in Kongo Central and 2 health zones in Kinshasa. The International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision approved the vaccine request for DRC and released 2 200 000 doses of vaccines and operational fund for the campaign.WHO classified the outbreak as a Grade 2 Emergency in accordance with the Emergency Response Framework (ERF). WHO has deployed a multidisciplinary team in Kongo Central and in Kinshasa to provide technical support to national authorities. The WHO Country Office has finalized a plan to mobilize further technical and financial resources for the control of the outbreak.WHO risk assessment-------------------DRC is located in a geographical area known to be at risk for YF transmission. Although cases are regularly reported, YF outbreaks in high population density areas are unusual. The confirmation of cases in Kinshasa and in other provinces highlights the risk of further spread of YF in DRC. Additional cases of local transmission are to be expected in the country due to the continuous importation of YF cases from Angola, the currently insufficient YF vaccination coverage, ecological factors and high vector density. Furthermore, there is a risk for the disease to spread to neighbouring countries because of heavy population movements in and out of DRC. It is, therefore, of paramount importance that national authorities in DRC implement adequate disease control and surveillance measures, especially reactive vaccination campaigns and cross border interventions, in order to avoid further spread of the disease. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conduct risk assessment based on the latest available information.WHO advice----------Yellow fever can easily be prevented by immunization provided vaccination is administered at least 10 days before travel. WHO urges Members States especially those where the establishment of a local cycle of transmission is possible (that is, where the competent vector is present) to strengthen the control of immunisation status of travellers to all potentially endemic areas. WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restriction to DRC based on the current information available.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The Congo DR situation is of serious concern. Vaccination of the areas where the locally acquired and imported cases have occurred is urgent. With the ""leaky"" Congo DR-Angola border, it is highly likely that additional imported cases will occur. There is significant risk that an outbreak in the Congo DR will be initiated. A previous report, above, indicated that only 2 million doses of YF vaccine were delivered, of the 20 million doses requested. - Mod.TY]
