WHO, Influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update -- 264 (based on data up to 15 May 2016)---------------------------------------------------------Summary-------Influenza activity in the northern hemisphere continued to decrease with a predominance of influenza B virus reported. In temperate countries in the southern hemisphere, influenza activity started to increase slightly in South America and South Africa, but remained low overall in most of Oceania.- In North America, influenza activity continued to decrease while the proportion of influenza B virus detections increased compared to previous reporting periods.- Influenza activity continued to decrease in Europe and temperate Asia with a predominance of influenza B virus activity.- In Africa, influenza activity was generally low with influenza A virus detections reported in Western Africa and influenza A and B virus detections reported in Eastern Africa.- In Central America and the Caribbean countries, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained generally low, although levels of A(H1N1)pdm09 virus activity continued to increase in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Panama. Active circulation of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 was also reported in Suriname. In Jamaica, severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) activity remained above the threshold and an increase in pneumonia cases was observed.- In tropical South America, increased influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 activity was reported in Bolivia. SARI activity was elevated in Ecuador together with a high proportion of samples positive for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus. Peru reported increased RSV detections.- In tropical countries of South Asia, influenza activity was generally low but several countries reported increased influenza virus detections.- In temperate South America, influenza-like illness (ILI) activity increased in recent weeks above seasonal thresholds. Increases in RSV activity in the region and influenza A detections in Argentina and Uruguay were also reported.- In the temperate countries of Southern Africa and Oceania, influenza virus activity remained low. Some islands in the Pacific reported increased ILI activity. Influenza activity started to increase in South Africa with mainly influenza B viruses detected.- National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 90 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 02 May 2016 to 15 May 2016 (data as of 27 May 2016 03:46:29 UTC). The WHO GISRS [Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System] laboratories tested more than 63813 specimens during that time period. 6224 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 2104 (33.8 percent) were typed as influenza A and 4120 (66.2 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 938 (79 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 249 (21 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 268 (25 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 804 (75 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.[The detailed influenza update can be accessed at the source URL above.]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Overall low influenza activity has been reported in most regions with mostly influenza B and some influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus reports. No novel influenza viruses have been reported. - Mod.UBA]
