Nature [edited]<http://www.nature.com/news/peru-s-gold-rush-prompts-public-health-emergency-1.19999>Peru's gold rush prompts public-health emergency------------------------------------------------Gold-mining boom in southeastern Amazon is driving high levels of mercury contamination.Many miners in Peru's Madre de Dios region use mercury to extract gold from sediments.Long-running concerns about the environmental effects of gold-mining in the Peruvian Amazon came to a head last week. Peru's government declared a 60-day public-health emergency on 23 May 2016 in an attempt to address the problem of mercury pollution caused by unregulated gold-mining along the Madre de Dios River.Health-care and emergency workers will this week begin providing medical and food aid for 25 affected villages, after a flurry of studies showed high levels of mercury in people, fish and sediments in the Madre de Dios region. The government estimates that some 48 000 people across 85 301 square kilometres [about 32 935 square miles] have been affected.""We now know with certainty what the source of the exposure is,"" says Peru's deputy health minister, Percy Minaya. ""We are not going to solve this in 2 months, or even in a year, but the Health Ministry has to start."" Symptoms of mercury poisoning include vomiting and diarrhoea. Extreme cases can lead to brain or kidney damage.The Madre de Dios region has a long history of small-scale alluvial gold-mining, but the rise in international gold prices in the past decade has brought a boom in the activity. Peru's National Institute of Statistics and Information in Lima reported on 23 May 2016 that gold production for March (2016) in Madre de Dios was 1583 kilograms, up 28 percent from the same month last year [2015].The region's miners extract the gold by sluicing sediment to separate gold-bearing sand, which they then mix with mercury to form an amalgamated lump of metal. Heating the lump vaporizes the mercury, leaving pure gold behind. The process sends an estimated 30-40 tonnes of mercury each year into waterways, where bacteria convert the metal into methylmercury. The methylmercury accumulates in fish, which are a key source of food for people in the Madre de Dios region.Body burden-----------Perhaps unsurprisingly, researchers at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina [USA], found high levels of mercury (above the maximum recommended by the World Health Organization) in hair samples from 40 percent of the Madre de Dios residents that they tested. The Duke team has examined about 800 people living along a major highway in the region, 100 people living beside the river and 2000 in the Amarakaeri Indigenous Reserve.Some communities in the region are closer to the gold-mining activities than others, but the 40 percent exposure rate held across the highway, river and reserve, says study leader William Pan, an epidemiologist with Duke's Global Health Initiative.The presence of mercury in human hair generally indicates that a person has been exposed to the metal through a dietary source. Pan says that the Duke studies in Madre de Dios show a strong correlation between human mercury exposure and fish consumption. Since 2009, studies by Pan's group [1], and by tropical ecologist Luis Fernandez at the Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford University in California [USA], have found high mercury levels in some species of fish, particularly large catfish and in fish that eat other fish.Peru's government used the Duke team's latest study to determine which riverside communities should receive the emergency aid. Officials are trying to help affected residents to replace the high-risk fish in their diets with other sources of protein. During the emergency period, the government will give food, including canned ocean fish, and multivitamins to combat anaemia, to roughly 15 000 of the 48 000 people affected.Routes of exposure------------------Pan says that these steps should reduce the body burden of mercury in people who also cut their consumption of contaminated fish, because the primary route of mercury exposure in the region seems to be through food.The government is also considering whether its food aid should include supplies of the grain quinoa. Preliminary data from Duke's household surveys in the Madre de Dios region shows a correlation between quinoa consumption and lower mercury levels.Minaya says that the government's long-term plan also includes helping communities to establish fish farms. However, the 60-day emergency period is set to end days before a new president -- who will be elected on 5 Jun 2016 -- takes office on 28 Jul 2016. But Minaya is confident that the next administration will continue to monitor and address the mercury pollution problem, despite opposition from regional and local government officials.They have criticized the emergency decree, arguing that the link between high mercury levels in people and fish consumption in the Madre de Dios region has not been proved. These officials are also worried that the government's decision to declare a public-health emergency could harm tourism in the nearby Man̼ National Park and Tambopata National Reserve.Because of the growing concerns about mercury exposure, Fernandez is leading a project at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to study the metal's effects on human and environmental health in the Amazon. As director of the Center for Amazonian Scientific Innovation at Wake Forest, Fernandez will lead a team of US researchers who are collaborating with colleagues at the Peruvian Amazon Research Institute and the National Amazonian University of Madre de Dios.References:1. Diringer, S. E. et al. Environ. Sci. Processes Impacts 17, 478-487 (2015).[Byline: Barbara Fraser]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Fish have been shown to be a source of intoxication to humans and other animals consuming them, when the fish have a high body burden of mercury.This article mentions the addition of mercury to the gold and then heating it, producing a mercury vapor prior to producing the gold amalgam. This is a major source of mercury inhalation, which produces high body burdens, and neurological signs.There are 3 forms of mercury: elemental mercury, inorganic mercury, and organic mercury.Elemental mercury is also known as metallic mercury, liquid mercury, liquid silver, and quicksilver and is an extremely heavy, odorless, silver-colored liquid. Mercury exists as a natural element in the earth's crust. Since this is the most likely form of mercury to which these children were exposed, this comment is confined to the toxicity of elemental mercury. There are several sources of elemental mercury in the home, including broken mercury thermometers, broken fluorescent light bulbs, dental amalgam fillings, mercury-containing latex paints, extraction of gold from ore using mercury, and contaminated clothing from workers in thermometer-making plants. Elemental mercury is also used as a Mexican folk medicine to treat ""empacho,"" a chronic stomach disorder.Elemental mercury is the most commonly swallowed form of mercury, usually from a broken thermometer. Fortunately, elemental mercury is not absorbed from the stomach and will not cause any poisoning in a healthy person. The swallowed mercury is slippery, and will roll into the stomach, out into the bowels, and will be quickly eliminated without causing any symptoms.However, if the person has severe inflammatory bowel disease or a fistula (hole or opening) in their intestine, problems may result if the mercury is not all cleared out, resulting in prolonged exposure.Handling liquid mercury for a very short period of time usually does not result in any problems. An allergic rash is possible. Mercury is not well-absorbed through the skin, so skin contact is not likely to cause mercury poisoning, especially with a brief one-time exposure. Even if a person has cuts in the skin, mercury is too heavy to be contained by a cut. Merely washing the wound well will remove the mercury.Inhalation of elemental mercury vapors is the main cause of toxicity, as mercury is well-absorbed through the lungs. Problems from inhalation result either from a large one-time exposure or a long-term exposure. A small, one-time exposure is not likely to cause problems.The lungs are the primary target organ following a large, one-time inhalation exposure of mercury vapor. Other signs and symptoms may develop as well. Clinical signs develop within a few hours and include chills, metallic taste, mouth sores, swollen gums, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, headache, weakness, confusion, shortness of breath, cough, chest tightness, bronchitis, pneumonia and kidney damage.Long-term exposure of inhaled vapors is generally more dangerous, with the nervous system being the primary target organ of toxicity. Symptoms may occur within weeks but usually develop insidiously over a period of years. Neurologic symptoms include tremors, headaches, short-term memory loss, incoordination, weakness, loss of appetite, altered sense of taste and smell, numbness and tingling in the hands and feet, insomnia, and excessive sweating. Psychiatric effects are also seen after long-term exposure. Acrodynia (painful extremities) can result from repeated exposures to mercury-containing latex paint fumes. Acrodynia is usually seen in younger children. The symptoms include chills, sweating, body rash, irritability, sleeplessness, leg cramps, swelling of the cheeks, nose, hands and feet, light sensitivity in the eyes, and peeling skin layers on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.People are regularly exposed to all 3 types of mercury, although the organic type is the most likely to cause adverse health effects because of its tendency to build up in the body.Mercury vapor is very dangerous. Symptoms of mercury poisoning are progressive. The 1st stage is paresthesia, distinguished by a tingling or numb sensation in the fingers, toes, and face. Paresthesia may be followed by difficulty walking and speaking, impaired vision and hearing, fatigue and weakness, headache and trouble concentrating, and tremors. Methods of detoxification or treatment are limited.In this particular case, awareness of what mercury does and instituting safety procedures seem paramount. It would appear that a lot of education is needed. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/16125>.]
