Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/philippines-zamboanga-outbreak-death-toll-rises-to-22-15938/>Philippines: Zamboanga outbreak death toll rises to 22------------------------------------------------------The outbreak of acute gastroenteritis (AGE) caused by at least 3 viruses, rotavirus, adenovirus and norovirus, in the southern Philippine city of Zamboanga has grown to some 3000 cases since it began in late March [2016].In addition, the death toll in ""Asia's Latin City"" is now at 22.According to city health officials, the hardest hit barangays include Calarian (166), Tetuan (164), Sta. Catalina (147), San Roque (144), Tumaga (138), Talon-Talon (132), Mampang (118), Tugbungan (110), Sta. Maria (104), and Guiwan (89).According to a GMA News report, City Health Officer Dr. Rodelin Agbulos said tests conducted by the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM) revealed the presence of rotavirus and adenovirus, along with the earlier suspected norovirus, in the patients.""We are not only dealing with 1 kind of virus, there are still other viruses. Actually, some of the patients, we are seeing 2 viruses in 1 patient,"" Agbulos said.In addition, city health officials report the presence of fecal coliforms in the water sources prompting chlorination and disinfection.Other actions taken were distribution of chlorine tablet to people who have deep wells, coordination with the Department of Health, public awareness on the increasing AGE cases, and conducting a 5-year review of AGE admitted cases in other hospitals in the city to establish the baseline value of AGE occurrence.[Byline: Robert Herriman] --Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Gastroenteritis, also known as infectious diarrhea, is inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract that involves the stomach and small intestine. Signs and symptoms include some combination of diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Fever, lack of energy, and dehydration may also occur. This typically lasts less than 2 weeks. It is unrelated to influenza though it has been called the stomach flu.Gastroenteritis can be due to infections by viruses, bacteria, parasites, and fungus. The most common cause is viruses. In children rotavirus is the most common cause of severe disease. In adults, norovirus and _Campylobacter_ are common. Transmission may occur due to eating improperly prepared foods, drinking contaminated water, or through close contact with an individual who is infected. Testing to confirm the diagnosis is typically not needed.Prevention includes hand washing with soap, drinking clean water, proper disposal of human waste, and breastfeeding babies instead of using formula. The rotavirus vaccine is recommended in children. Treatment involves getting enough fluids. For mild or moderate cases, this can typically be achieved by drinking oral rehydration solution (a combination of water, salts, and sugar). In those who are breast fed, continued breastfeeding is recommended. For more severe cases, intravenous fluids may be needed. Fluids may also be given by a nasogastric tube. Zinc supplementation is recommended in children. Antibiotics are generally not needed.It is estimated that 3 to 5 billion cases of gastroenteritis resulting in 1.4 million deaths occur globally each year. Children and those in the developing world are most commonly affected. As of 2011, in those below age 5, there were about 1.7 billion cases resulting in 0.7 million deaths. In the developing world children less than 2 years of age frequently get 6 or more infections a year. It is less common in adults, partly due to the development of immunity.(See references for this information at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gastroenteritis>.) - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1017>.]
