WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/03-june-2016-oropouche-peru/en/>Oropouche virus disease -- Peru-------------------------------On 2 May 2016, the Ministry of Health of Peru reported 57 cases of Oropouche fever. The majority of cases are from towns located in the northern part of the Cusco Region, which is situated in the Amazon rainforest.Most cases (79 percent) were detected in January [2016], with only 7 percent and 14 percent of the cases being identified in February and March, respectively. To date, there have been no fatalities and all cases have recovered following symptomatic treatment.In February 2016, a field mission to the Madre de Dios Region [in southeastern Peru] conducted jointly by the MoH of Peru and PAHO/WHO revealed a mixed outbreak of dengue (DENV-2) and Oropouche viruses. While Madre de Dios already experienced an outbreak of Oropouche fever in 1994, at the time of the mission in February, this latest outbreak was of a higher magnitude (120 confirmed cases).Public health response----------------------Peruvian health authorities have implemented the following public health measures:- providing medical treatment to the cases;- conducting epidemiological and entomological investigations;- strengthening vector control.WHO risk assessment-------------------Cases of infection with Oropouche virus have already been reported in the past in Peru. However, it is the 1st time that the Cusco Region records cases of Oropouche fever. It will be critical to establish whether the competent vector, the _Culicoides paraensis_ midge, is present in Cusco as that could provide some explanation for the emergence of the disease in this specific area. At present, the possibility of further cases being detected in the Cusco Region and in the rest of Peru cannot be excluded. Given the wide geographical distribution of the competent vector in the Region of the Americas, the risk of cases being identified in other countries is significant. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conduct risk assessments based on the latest available information.WHO advice----------Given its clinical presentation, Oropouche fever should be included in the clinical differential diagnosis for other common arboviral diseases (such as chikungunya, dengue, yellow fever, Zika virus).The proximity of midge vector breeding to human habitation is a significant risk factor for Oropouche virus infection. Prevention and control relies on reducing the breeding of midges through source reduction (removal and modification of breeding sites) and reducing contact between midges and people. This can be achieved by reducing the number of natural and artificial water-filled habitats that support midge larvae, reducing the adult midge populations around at-risk communities and by using barriers such as insect screens, closed doors and windows, long clothing and repellents.Background----------Oropouche fever is caused by the Oropouche virus. In humans, it is transmitted primarily through the bite of the midge _Culicoides paraensis_. No direct transmission of the virus from human to human has been documented.Oropouche fever causes symptoms similar to those of dengue with an incubation period of 4-8 days (range: 3-12 days). Symptoms include the sudden onset of high fever, headache, myalgia, joint pain, and vomiting. In some patients it can cause clinical symptoms of aseptic meningitis.In the Americas, outbreaks of Oropouche fever virus have been reported from rural and urban communities of Brazil, Ecuador, Panama, Peru, and Trinidad and Tobago.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Sporadic cases of Oropouche fever, or outbreaks, can be expected in areas in Peru where the culicoid vector is present. As the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) has noted, ""the Oropouche virus exists in nature in 2 cycles, the wild and urban-epidemic cycles. In the wild cycle, wildlife such as primates, sloths, and certain arthropods serve as reservoirs, with the [culicoid midge, _Culicoides paraensis_] flies acting as vectors. In the urban epidemic cycle, the infection cycle remains vector-human-vector, with humans acting as the principal hosts. Oropouche virus is a bunyavirus of the Simbu group. No vaccine is available, so avoidance of bites by the vector midge is the best preventive measure. Maps of Peru can be accessed at <http://www.geographicguide.com/pictures/peru-map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3241>. - Mod.TY]
