ReliaWire [edited]<http://reliawire.com/chicken-pox-glioma/>Chickenpox May Reduce Later Risk of Brain Cancer------------------------------------------------Chickenpox is a highly contagious disease that affects kids and makes their parents worry a lot. On the other hand, experts believe it may bestow a positive health benefit later in life, in the form of a lowered risk of developing glioma.An international collaboration led by researchers in the Dan L Duncan Comprehensive Cancer Center at Baylor College of Medicine has reported there is an inverse relationship between a history of chickenpox and glioma, a type of brain cancer. In other words, children who have had the chickenpox may be less likely to develop brain cancer.But this doesn't mean parents should drop everything and start organizing chickenpox parties.Since chickenpox in adults is usually more severe than it is in children, some parents deliberately expose their children to the virus, sometimes by taking them to ""chickenpox parties."" Doctors counter that children are safer getting the vaccine, which is a weakened form of the virus, than getting the disease, which can be fatal.The current study, led by Dr. Melissa Bondy, a McNair Scholar and associate director for cancer prevention and population sciences at Baylor, and Dr. E. Susan Amirian, assistant professor in the Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor, was one of the largest studies to date.The study involved reviewing information from the Glioma International Case-Control Study, a large, multi-site consortium with data on 4533 cases and 4171 controls collected across 5 countries. The researchers found a 21 percent reduced risk of developing glioma with a positive history of chickenpox.Furthermore, they identified the protective effective was greater in higher grade gliomas. The large study validates earlier studies showing this link, Bondy said.""It provides more of an indication that there is some protective benefit from having the chickenpox,"" she said. ""The link is unlikely to be coincidental.""In the future, scientists may be able to apply the chickenpox vaccine to brain cancer research. Gliomas make up about 30 percent of all brain and central nervous system tumors and 80 percent of all malignant brain tumors.Citation: Amirian, E. S., Scheurer, M. E., Zhou, R., et al. (2016) History of chickenpox in glioma risk: a report from the glioma international case-control study (GICC) Cancer Medicine. doi: 10.1002/cam4.682 <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cam4.682/full>[Byline: Bruce B. Vanderburg]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Varicella zoster virus [VZV] is a neurotropic alpha-herpesvirus. Like other herpesviruses, VZV has the capacity to persist in the body after the primary (1st) infection as a latent infection. VZV persists in sensory nerve ganglia. Primary infection with VZV results in chickenpox. Herpes zoster (shingles) is the result of reactivation of latent VZV infection. An increasingly large body of evidence is building supporting an inverse relationship between VZV and glioma. The conclusions to the paper above state:""Findings from the previous literature, bolstered by those of our study, provide strong epidemiologic rationale for continued investigation of the potential role of chickenpox (or other manifestations of VZV infection) in glioma development. Future studies will need to account for the potential impact of the VZV vaccine, which was licensed in 1995 in the U.S. for use among children (and therefore cannot be evaluated in the older population of the GICC). Prior serologic analyses have demonstrated that antibody composition differs between children who experience a wild-type VZV infection versus those who were received the vaccine. Some evidence indicates that antibodies against specific VZV-encoded proteins (i.e., VZV ORF2 and IE63) may be more important than others in conferring protection against glioma, but the vaccine does not contain antigens corresponding to all 70 VZV open reading frames. Thus, future research ascertaining whether the vaccine confers similar protection against glioma as the wild-type VZV infection is of high importance and may lend insight into the biological mechanisms at play.""This study and an earlier review of the literature -- posted below -- provide very enticing support for the inverse relationship between glioma and varicella infection. A review of the relationship between varicella and glioma was previously published in 2014:Pundole X, Amirian ES, Scheurer ME. Role of varicella zoster virus in glioma risk: Current knowledge and future directions. OA Epidemiology 2014 Mar 22;2(1):6. <http://www.oapublishinglondon.com/article/1371>""Conclusion""The role of VZV and other herpes virus infections in brain tumour aetiology requires further epidemiologic investigation. Future studies should focus on assessing how age at primary VZV infection is relevant to anti-VZV antibody response and, in turn, glioma risk. In addition to anti-VZV IgG levels, a more comprehensive panel of biomarkers of VZV infection and immunity, such as viral DNA, measures of viral expression (protein and RNA transcripts), and markers of cell-mediated immunity, should be identified and incorporated into future studies. Furthermore, because most studies of glioma and VZV are case-control studies, more prospective studies are necessary to untangle the temporal relationships between infection and tumorogenesis. As glioma is a rare disease, this may only be feasible in Northern European countries with centralized medical databases. Finally, as the literature comes to a consensus on the role of VZV infection in glioma risk, interactions between atopy and VZV immunity should also be examined. Stratification of VZV-glioma analyses by IgE levels or childhood history of atopic conditions may provide useful information on how these factors are inter-related.""Another factor that will need to be accounted for in future studies is whether anti-VZV IgG positive participants were immunized against VZV or if they had an actual VZV infection. Antibody composition differs between individuals who experienced a wild-type VZV infection compared to those who were exposed to the live attenuated vaccine. It is, therefore, important to investigate the association between VZV immunity and glioma, distinguishing between infected and vaccinated individuals. If differences are noted between these groups, this knowledge may point toward specific viral antigenic targets that may be of greater relevance to gliomagenesis, perhaps because they resemble an antigen present on tumour cells.""The literature is slowly approaching a consensus on the inverse association between VZV infection and immunity and glioma risk. However, several gaps in knowledge, outlined above, still need to be filled before definitive conclusions can be drawn about this potentially complex relationship."" - Mod.LK]
