AllAfrica, The Citizen report [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201606070017.html>Yellow fever certificates, which are supposed to be issued only to people who have been vaccinated against the tropical disease, are on sale on Dar es Salaam streets, an investigation by The Citizen has established. The government is currently grappling with an acute shortage of yellow fever vaccine, prompting racketeers to cash in on the crisis.Posing as a would-be traveller, this reporter was told where he could get a certificate without being vaccinated. 2 people, who were scheduled to fly out last [Thu 2 Jun 2016], said they had obtained yellow fever certificates from well-connected individuals operating at Mnazi Mmoja Hospital in Ilala Municipality [Dar es Salaam]. This, according to public health experts, is in complete disregard of health rules.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines, which also apply in Tanzania, travellers should take precautions against mosquito bites when in areas with confirmed yellow fever transmission. ""If you continue to live or travel in yellow fever-endemic areas, you should receive a booster dose of yellow fever vaccine after 10 years,"" says CDC. [WHO now states that the vaccination is good for life. - Mod.TY]However, people bypass this procedure. In Tanzania, where the vaccine is reported to have run out, people have now opted to buy the certificates on a massive scale without actually being vaccinated against the disease. ""If you want one, don't bother going into the vaccination room. The government has run out of the vaccine. Just look around the hospital and you will get this certificate,"" a would-be traveller told this reporter. A man outside the vaccination centre (name withheld) assured this reporter that he could get as many as 100 certificates for Sh 5000 [USD 2.28] each if there were ""enough"" people who desperately needed the documents.Last week [week of 30 May 2016], the acting director of Preventive Services in the Ministry of Health, Dr Khalid Mussa, was quoted saying the certificates were being sold by people who were not government employees, adding that plans were under way to introduce new cards which could not be easily forged.Health ministry spokesperson Nsachris Mwamwaja has told The Citizen the government ordered over 1000 doses of yellow fever vaccine from France to alleviate the current shortage.[byline: And Syriacus Buguzi]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The sale of fake yellow fever (YF) vaccination cards has been a sporadic problem in several countries in Africa. The current report of the sale of fake YF cards in Tanzania is of serious concern. There are YF cases in neighboring Uganda, and the ongoing risk of YF virus infected individuals traveling between Angola and Tanzania.The sale of fake YF vaccination cards to individuals who have not received the vaccine presents a serious public health problem inside Tanzania and outside of it. Susceptible, unvaccinated individuals can contribute to a YF outbreak within countries where YF cases are occurring. Also, an unvaccinated, viremic individual with a fake card who becomes infected could carry YF virus to localities where vector mosquitoes are present and initiate an outbreak of this serious disease. One wonders, if the practice of issuance of fake YF cards continues, whether countries that are currently YF-free but are most at risk of ongoing transmission should the virus be introduced, in Central and North America, South and South East Asia, will deny visas to or admittance of individuals carrying vaccination certificates issued in Tanzania unless they can prove that their cards are legitimate. Health and civil authorities need to halt the sale of fake cards promptly. It is also critical that YF vaccine be consistently available in government clinics at affordable cost so that there is no demand for the purchase of cards. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9741>.]
