Reuters [edited]<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-yellowfever-congo-idUSKCN0YU2H2>A new case of yellow fever detected in the Democratic Republic of Congo's capital was transmitted by a local mosquito, the World Health Organization said on [Wed 8 Jun 2016], raising the possibility of a wider outbreak of the disease in the country.The case, confirmed this week after testing by the Pasteur Institute in Dakar and the National Institute of Biomedical Research, was not an imported case from neighboring Angola as other recent cases were, WHO spokesman Eugene Kabambi said. ""Measures are being taken to strengthen investigation around this case to prevent the spread,"" Kabambi said in an email. ""Social mobilization activities and surveillance are going on with WHO support.""This was the 2nd case of the disease transmitted inside the country, following a case in April [2016], WHO said. It was not clear how many mosquitoes in Congo may be carrying yellow fever or what effect this will have on a spread of the virus that has already infected nearly 3000 people in Angola in the last 4 months, of which about 325 died, according to WHO.But yellow fever can spread fast in highly populated areas, with devastating consequences. So far there have been 52 laboratory-confirmed cases of yellow fever in Congo, most of which have come from Angola. The disease has already spread to Kenya and China and there is an unrelated outbreak in Uganda, generating fears of the mosquitoborne fever jumping to sprawling cities in Asia and Africa.The outbreaks of yellow fever in Angola and the Congo do not constitute a global health emergency but require stepped-up control measures and mass vaccination, WHO said last month [May 2016].[reporting by Aaron Ross; writing by Edward McAllister; editing by Toby Chopra]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is difficult to assess the risk that this single, locally acquired case has for the large city of Kinshasa. The virus was transmitted in the city and the YF virus infected mosquito acquired its infectious blood meal there. It is not known if the host who provided the mosquito's infectious blood meal was also locally infected or had acquired the infection in Angola, as most of the recognized 52 YF cases in the Congo DR have been. The city is reported to have the elements present that could support a significant outbreak -- ample mosquito vectors and a large population of unvaccinated, hence, susceptible, human hosts. Aggressive surveillance and a vaccination campaign if additional cases are found is prudent.A 2 Jun WHO report indicated that on 26 May 2016, a reactive campaign vaccination began with a target of 1 983 597 people from 9 health zones in Kongo Central and 2 health zones in Kinshasa (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20160604.4262798). The International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision approved the vaccine request for DRC and released 2.2 million doses of vaccine and operational fund for the campaign. One hopes that this quantity of vaccine is adequate to provide 80 percent coverage in the areas at risk. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/194>.]
