World Health Organization, Communicable Disease Surveillance & Response (CSR), Disease Outbreak News [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/08-june-2016-ah5n6-china/en/>On 30 May 2016, the National Health and Family Planning Commission (NHFPC) of China notified WHO of one laboratory-confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N6) virus.Details of the case-------------------A 50 year old male living in Xiangxi Autonomous Prefecture, Hunan Province developed symptoms on 23 May 2016. On 24 May, he visited a doctor in a village clinic and on 28 May, was transferred to a hospital and was in critical condition at the time of reporting. The case was confirmed as A(H5N6) by laboratory testing, supplemented with clinical manifestation and epidemiology findings on 28 May. Close contacts of this case remain healthy. The investigation is ongoing.Public health response----------------------The Chinese government has taken the following surveillance and control measures:- strengthening surveillance, analysis and research;- further enhancing the medical care of the case;- conducting public risk communication and releasing information.WHO risk assessment-------------------This report does not change the overall public health risk associated with avian influenza A(H5N6) viruses. Although influenza A(H5N6) has caused severe infection in humans, until now human infections with the virus seem to be sporadic with no ongoing human to human transmission and close contacts of the case remain healthy. However, the characterization of this virus is ongoing and its implication to the evolution and emergence of a pandemic strain is unknown. The risk of international disease spread is considered to be low at this point in time. WHO continues to assess the epidemiological situation and conduct further risk assessment based on the latest information.WHO advice----------WHO advises that travelers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid poultry farms, contact with animals in live bird markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travelers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, in order to ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/341>.]
