Business News 24 BD [edited]<http://businessnews24bd.com/anthrax-outbreak-monitoring-lapses-real-concern/>Anthrax outbreak: monitoring lapses real concern------------------------------------------------A cattle farmer of Koira Soratola village in Ullapara [Sirajganj District, Rajshahi Division] was worried when one of his cows fell sick and died. After his 2nd cow fell sick, he slaughtered it and sold the meat to a local butcher at a cheap rate. ""One of my 6 cows fell sick and died 2 weeks ago, causing me a loss of Tk 40 000 [about USD 500]. When my 2nd cow got infected, I slaughtered it and sold the meat to recover some loss,"" he said.[Another resident of] the same village slaughtered a diseased cow after it fell sick last month [May 2016]. Asked why he slaughtered the diseased cattle, he said he had done so only to recoup some losses. ""I just got half the price of the cow.""[The 2 residents] are among the 44 people of Koira Soratola who were identified with anthrax infection. According to district health officials, they were involved in the processing of meat.Reasons for [human] outbreak----------------------------Reckless slaughtering of diseased cattle was the reason behind the recent outbreak of anthrax in Ullapara, Shahzadpur and Kamarkhand upazilas of Sirajganj, according to the district health department. Officials of the district livestock department said that although they were trying to make people aware, locals were not following their directives. Rather, the villagers were slaughtering diseased cattle without informing them.However, locals claimed that had there been proper monitoring by the district livestock department officials, the outbreak in the areas could have been prevented. Besides, they alleged that the livestock department officials had not given vaccines to animals in the last one year. Vaccines were given only after the animals got infected, not before.A total of 125 people were infected with anthrax in the 3 upazilas until [30 May 2016]. Of them, 44 were found in the Ullapara's Koira Soratola village alone, 32 in Kamarkhand and 49 in Shahzadpur in the last month, according to the office of the district civil surgeon.The district health department opened 35 medical teams in the affected upazilas to tackle the ongoing outbreak of infection. Of them, 5 teams are working in Kamarkhand upazila and the other 15 teams are working in Ullapara and Shahzadpur upazilas for the last couple of weeks.Sirajganj is one of the largest milk producing areas in the country. Besides, it is famous for rearing of cows. There are about 9 lakh [900 000] cattle in the district. Of them, some 3.5 lakh [350 000] are in Shahzadpur, 2 lakh [200 000] in Ullapara, and 55 000 in Kamarkhand upazila, according to district livestock officials.According to experts, Sirajganj is the most vulnerable to anthrax infection because the germ of the disease has been there since a long time. Caused by bacterium _Bacillus anthracis_, anthrax is an acute infectious disease which attacks both animals and humans. ""The bacteria normally rest in the soil, and can survive for 60 to 100 years in that state. It might have been brought to the district through any diseased animal earlier. When the animal died, people buried it in the field. So the germ got mixed with the soil,"" said Gulzar Hossain, deputy director of regional disease research centre in Sirajganj.Cattle are infected while grazing the grass, and die within 4 to 5 days, he explained. ""The spread of anthrax in the area this year is due to toxic reaction in the soil caused by strong humidity and slight rain,"" Gulzar said. ""There is no way to destroy the germ. We have to take preventive measures so that the animals cannot spread the disease,"" he said.If the animal gets proper vaccination in time, the disease will not spread, he added.What officials have to say--------------------------Talking to The Daily Star, district livestock officer (DLO) Akteruzzaman Bhuiyan said they have a shortage of manpower to monitor slaughter everywhere in the district. Although there are posts for 2 veterinary surgeons and 7 officials in each of the 9 upazilas in the district, only 6 surgeons and around 35 officials are now working there, he said.The DLO said they were trying to make people aware of the risk in slaughtering diseased animals, but most people were not following the directives. Butchers had also been ordered to get their animals certified by livestock officers before slaughtering, he added. ""Villagers slaughter animals soon after they fell sick, without informing local livestock officials. Besides, it is very difficult to monitor slaughter at every market as most of the villages are in remote areas,"" he said.Akteruzzaman said a total of 2.25 lakh [225 000] cattle were given vaccines in the last few weeks in the affected upazilas, and the vaccination programme would cover other areas soon.Anthrax infection in Sirajganj------------------------------Experts said the anthrax patients in the 3 upazilas suffered infections on different parts of their bodies, including hands and legs followed by itches and pain. However, those were not life threatening.""In Sirajganj, we've surveyed and found anthrax infection on people's skin. As they came in contact with the blood and meat of the diseased animal, they got infected. However, this is not life threatening. Strong antibiotics can help recover the infection within few weeks,"" said Ismail Faruk, chief scientific officer of the Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research.However, if the internal organs like the intestines or lungs are infected, that would be more serious and could lead to death, he said. ""But we have not found any such patient till date,"" Faruk said. ""The germ of anthrax can be destroyed in 60 degree Celsius temperature, so the cooked meat can't affect the human body,"" the officer added. [Only the vegetative cells at that temperature. One needs to go higher to kill any spores.]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[A classic description of human anthrax in the rural community. But yet again what is forgotten by the medical public health fraternity is that this is a zoonotic disease that thrives in livestock, especially unvaccinated stock. The most cost effective way of dealing with it is by proactive annual vaccination of the livestock in known affected areas, which in the case of Bangladesh is the whole country. If they were to just start with Sirajganj they would soon see this disease disappear from that province. With that confidence they could then take on the different regions in turn.With outbreak surveillance in place and thus confidence that there have been no cases in a 6-8 year period, one can stop vaccinating, and wait and watch. If an outbreak occurs it can be treated as a local phenomenon necessitating the revaccinating only of the affected farm and its immediate neighbours. At the same time investigate that outbreak as to whether it was from a contaminated site on-farm or from purchased feed or forage. In spite of the claims of spore immortality, they do die and at about 30 per cent/year. So an effective control and surveillance programme results in eradication within 10-12 years or so. What stretches it out is the non-vaccinated livestock recontaminating the soil. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/13276>.]
