WHO Emergencies, yellow fever situation report [edited]<http://who.int/emergencies/yellow-fever/situation-reports/9-june-2016/en/>A yellow fever outbreak [YF] was detected in Luanda, Angola late in December 2015. The 1st cases were confirmed by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa on 19 Jan 2016 and by the Institut Pasteur Dakar (IP-D) on 20 Jan 2016. Subsequently, a rapid increase in the number of cases has been observed.Emergency Committee regarding yellow feverFollowing the advice of the Emergency Committee (EC) convened on 19 May 2016, WHO director-general decided that urban yellow fever outbreaks in Angola and DRC are serious public health events which warrant intensified national action and enhanced international support. The events do not at this time constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).SummaryAngola:2954 suspected casesFrom the beginning of the outbreak on 15 Dec 2015 to 8 Jun 2016, Angola has reported 2954 suspected cases of yellow fever including 328 deaths. Among those cases, 819 have been laboratory confirmed. Despite extensive vaccination campaigns in several provinces, circulation of the virus persists. [There is a series of monthly maps in this report showing the spread of YF from January-June 2016.] As of 8 Jun 2016, 3 new provinces in Angola have reported local transmission, bringing the total number of districts with local transmission to 33 in 11 provinces, including Luanda.The total number of reported cases in Angola increased from 11 Apr 2016 onward, while the number of laboratory confirmed cases remains stable. This can be attributed to the intensification of surveillance activities in most provinces.Democratic Republic of The Congo:57 laboratory confirmed casesFrom the beginning of the outbreak on 22 Mar 2016 to 8 Jun 2016, the Democratic Republic of The Congo (DRC) has reported 3 probable cases and 57 laboratory confirmed cases: 51 of those are imported from Angola, reported in Kongo Central, Kinshasa and Kwango provinces, 2 are sylvatic cases in Northern provinces, and 4 are autochthonous cases in Ndjili and Kimbanseke districts, in Matadi (Kongo Central) and in Kwango province.Uganda:68 suspect casesFrom the beginning of the outbreak on 9 Apr 2016 to 8 Jun 2016, the Ministry of Health of Uganda has reported 68 suspected cases, of which 3 are probable and 7 are laboratory confirmed. Confirmed cases have been reported from 3 districts: Masaka (5 cases), Rukungiri (one case) and Kalangala (one case). According to sequencing results, those clusters are not epidemiologically linked to Angola.The risk of spreadThe virus in Angola and DRC is largely concentrated in main cities; however there is a high risk of spread and local transmission to other provinces in both countries. There is also a high risk of potential spread to bordering countries especially those previously classified as low-risk for yellow fever disease (that is, Namibia, Zambia) and where the population, travellers and foreign workers are not vaccinated against yellow fever.3 countries have reported confirmed yellow fever cases imported from Angola: DRC (51 cases), Kenya (2 cases) and the People's Republic of China (11 cases). This highlights the risk of international spread through non-immunised travellers.A further 3 countries have reported suspected cases of yellow fever: Ethiopia (one probable case), Ghana (4 suspect cases) and the Republic of Congo (one suspect case). Investigations are ongoing to identify the vaccination status of the cases and determine if they are linked with Angola. The 2 suspect cases previously reported in Sao Tome and Principe have been discarded.Risk assessmentThe outbreak in Angola remains of high concern due to:- persistent local transmission in Luanda despite the fact that approximately 8 million people have been vaccinated.- local transmission has been reported in 11 highly populated provinces including Luanda. Kuanza Norte, Luanda Norte, Cunene and Malenge are the provinces that most recently reported local yellow fever transmission.- the continued extension of the outbreak to new provinces and new districts.- high risk of spread to neighbouring countries. As the borders are porous with substantial cross border social and economic activities, further transmission cannot be excluded. Viraemic travelling patients pose a risk for the establishment of local transmission especially in countries where adequate vectors and susceptible human populations are present.- risk of establishment of local transmission in other provinces where no autochthonous cases are reported.- high index of suspicion of ongoing transmission in hard-to-reach areas like Cabinda.- inadequate surveillance system capable of identifying new foci or areas of cases emerging.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The YF situation in the 3 countries with local transmission of the virus -- Angola, the Congo DR and Uganda -- continues to be of very serious concern, now going on nearly 6 months since the 1st cases were detected in Angola. Interestingly, a 10 Jun 2016 report indicated that the 1st cases in Angola had YF vaccination cards, leading to the suspicion that the cards were fake (<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/reuters/article-3635328/Fake-vaccination-papers-let-yellow-fever-spread-Angola.html>). If this was, in fact, the case, it is a dramatic illustration of the serious consequences that the issuance of fake cards can bring -- thousands of cases and hundreds of deaths. One hopes that the points listed in the above WHO risk assessment will be addressed.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the locations of the African countries mentioned can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3948>. - Mod.TY]******[2] Vaccine supply and demandDate: Wed 8 Jun 2016Source: The New England Journal of Medicine DOI: 10.1056/NEJMp1606997 [edited]<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1606997#t=article>Alan D T Barrett. Yellow fever in Angola and beyond -- the problem of vaccine supply and demand---------------------------------------------------------------------Given that we have a highly effective yellow fever vaccine that confers lifelong immunity with one dose, why is yellow fever still a problem? Much of the answer comes down to vaccine supply and demand.The 17D vaccine is a ""legacy"" vaccine produced in embryonated chicken eggs using technology that has changed little since the 1940s, when the seed-lot system was introduced. 3 17D substrains (17D-204, 17DD, and 17D-213) are used as vaccines. They have minor differences in genome sequences, but all have proved to be excellent vaccines. Currently, there are only 6 manufacturers of yellow fever vaccine worldwide, and they collectively produce approximately 50 million to 100 million doses each year; 4 (Institut Pasteur, Senegal; Bio-Manguinhos/Fiocruz, Brazil; Chumakov Institute of Poliomyelitis and Viral Encephalitides, Russia; and Sanofi Pasteur, France) are ""prequalified"" by WHO to distribute vaccine internationally and 2 (Sanofi Pasteur, United States; and Wuhan Institute of Biological Products, China) make vaccine for domestic markets. Thus, the number of producers and the manufacturing process limit the amount of vaccine available.Furthermore, there is a requirement for a minimum amount of virus in a dose (1000 IU) but no maximum amount per dose, and some manufacturers' lots contain 10^(6.5) IU per dose (over 1000 times the minimum). Although all vaccines have proved efficacious overall, the potency of the vaccines produced by the 6 manufacturers varies. Currently, about 6 million doses are kept in reserve for emergencies. That quantity is adequate for most years, but occasionally -- now, for instance, or during the 2008 epidemic in South America -- these reserves are insufficient to meet the demand from large outbreaks, particularly when they affect areas where yellow fever is not seen very often, as in Angola, which had gone decades without an urban outbreak.Clearly, there is a need to increase the vaccine supply, but a number of approaches could improve the situation in the future. 1st, we can increase the reserve stockpile kept for emergencies. 2nd, regulators and WHO could set a maximum for the amount of vaccine in a dose. Studies have shown that 3000 IU (1/50 of the quantity in a dose of at least one current vaccine) or less is sufficient to stimulate protective immunity. Consequently, vaccine bulk could be diluted in manufacturing freeze-dried vaccine, but studies would be needed to investigate the stability of diluted versus undiluted vaccine and the duration of protective immunity.Relatedly, a dose-sparing approach has been suggested, in which a fraction of the current dose could be given to vaccinees once a vaccine vial had been opened. This approach would have to be evaluated carefully to ensure that vaccinees received the appropriate quantity of diluted vaccine. In addition, the vaccine is recommended for persons 9 months of age or older (6 months or older in epidemic situations), and studies would be needed to determine whether dose-sparing vaccination was equivalent in children and adults.Similarly, some experts have suggested using intradermal immunization rather than the traditional intramuscular or subcutaneous route. Although that option seems promising, the limited studies that have been conducted included no comparison between intradermal and conventional subcutaneous immunization with the same dose of vaccine. Moreover, these studies have involved vaccine from only 2 of the 6 manufacturers.A 3rd approach is to shift manufacturing from embryonated chicken eggs to a continuous cell line. This possibility proved unsuccessful when it was investigated in the 1980s, but cell-culture technology has greatly improved in the past 30 years. Notably, Sanofi Pasteur manufactures its chimeric yellow fever 17D-dengue (Dengvaxia) and chimeric yellow fever 17D-Japanese encephalitis (Imojev) vaccines in monkey kidney Vero cells, which suggests that Vero cells could be used to manufacture 17D vaccine. Of course, the immunogenicity and safety profile of such a Vero-cell-derived vaccine would need to be compared with that of currently licensed egg-derived vaccines.Finally, there have been no systematic studies investigating the genome sequences of wild-type yellow fever virus strains from outbreaks to elucidate the evolution of the virus and help model the potential for outbreaks. There are 40 genomic sequences of wild-type yellow fever virus isolates in GenBank, of which 12 are from Brazil and 14 from Senegal, though the virus is currently found in 44 other countries. We still have much to learn about wild-type yellow fever virus.In the short term, there will be difficulties in ensuring that sufficient vaccine is available to fight this major public health problem, but we have the opportunity to avoid vaccine shortfalls in the future. Toward that end, WHO periodically reviews ""Recommendations to assure the quality, safety and efficacy of live attenuated yellow fever vaccines"". Now may be the time to revisit these requirements, which were last reviewed in 2010.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This assessment provides a useful and comprehensive overview of the current YF vaccine situation, and a good response to the question of ""why not just ramp up production?"" when there is serious concern that current vaccine stocks are not adequate for vaccination campaigns in Africa. The dilemma with implementation of the dose sparing approach (1/5 the normal dose) under current circumstances is: is it better to try that dose or to run out of vaccine? Interestingly, a 9 Jun 2016 report indicates that the concern for vaccine shortage has prompted the World Health Organization (WHO) to draw up plans to extend vaccine availability by using 1/5 of the normal dose (<https://www.statnews.com/2016/06/09/yellow-fever-vaccine-who/>). - Mod.TY]******[3] Red Cross/Red Crescent responseDate: Wed 8 Jun 2016Source: IFRC News [edited]<http://www.ifrc.org/en/news-and-media/press-releases/africa/angola/red-cross-calls-for-immediate-scale-up-in-response-to-deadly-yellow-fever-outbreak-in-angola/>Concerned by the ongoing spread of the yellow fever outbreak in Angola and beyond, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) is calling for an immediate scale-up in response. ""Limited vaccine supplies, poor sanitation, inadequate disease surveillance systems and everyday cross-border interaction could turn a national outbreak into a larger crisis, if immediate community-based action is not taken,"" said Dr Fatoumata Nafo-Traor̩, director, IFRC Africa region.Out of the 5 countries which have reported imported yellow fever cases that originated in Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Congo are now experiencing outbreaks with local transmission.""Vaccinations are the 1st and best line of defence,"" said Dr Nafo-Traor̩. ""However, given the limited supply of yellow fever vaccine globally, we need to prioritize community engagement as a vital tool to prevent the further spread of the disease.""In Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the IFRC has deployed Regional Disaster Response Team members, and released start-up funds from its Disaster Relief Emergency Fund to support operations aimed at halting the spread of the virus. Staff and volunteers with the Angola Red Cross have supported the country's vaccination campaign. They have also been conducting social mobilization in communities, as have personnel from the Red Cross of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Teams conduct door-to-door visits, instructing people on the measures they can take to reduce their risk of falling ill with yellow fever. This includes vector control to eliminate sites where mosquitoes can breed.In addition to the ground level work currently being carried out by the World Health Organization, UNICEF and other partners, the IFRC is further deploying a Field Assessment Coordination Team to Angola to conduct an in-depth assessment of needs and gaps, primarily focused on improved community surveillance, vector control, and addressing rumours that are spreading about the disease and vaccinations. The expanded emergency operation will focus on newly-affected districts and in border areas.Dr Adinoyi Adeiza, IFRC health coordinator, Africa region, said: ""With our decades of experience of deploying community-based volunteers to help prevent and respond to vector-borne diseases such as malaria, dengue and chikungunya, the Red Cross can play a key role in managing this outbreak.""5 countries have reported imported yellow fever cases confirmed to have come from people who had travelled to Angola: 88 in Congo-Brazzaville; 44 in Democratic Republic of the Congo; 2 each in Kenya and Sao Tome; and 11 in China. ""We are extremely concerned about the further spread of this outbreak, particularly to countries bordering Angola, such as Namibia and Zambia,"" added Dr Adeiza. ""Non-immunized people traveling across these countries could pose a significant risk.""--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall[The assistance of the IFRC teams is most welcome. Although elimination of all of the vector mosquito breeding sites is not possible, those water catchments can be reduced or treated with larvicides. One hopes that the vaccination teams are able to obtain the vaccine. - Mod.TY]
