Myanmar Times [edited]http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/national-news/yangon/20789-diphtheria-outbreak-claims-six-lives.htmlThe Ministry of Health [of Myanmar] has confirmed that 6 children have died from diphtheria in Yangon and Ayeyarwady regions this year [2016]. According to the Public Health Regional Report for diphtheria, a contagious bacterial disease, cases have been discovered in Yangon, Ayeyarwady and Magwe regions.U Than Tun Aung, deputy director of the public health department, told The Myanmar Times that 5 children died in Yangon and one child succumbed to the disease in Ayeyarwady Region. 10 cases, out of which 5 were deadly, were discovered in the Shwe Pyi Thar nunnery in Yangon.Diphtheria predominantly affects children under the age of 15 and most cases are caused by the _Corynebacterium diphtheriae_ bacterium. The disease is usually spread person-to-person through sneezing or coughing. Symptoms start 2 to 5 days after exposure and often include a sore throat and fever. Without medical treatment, patients can die from the infection within 2 days, according to U Than Tun Aung.Diphtheria occurs in 20 and 60 patients every year in Myanmar. Last year [2015] saw a spike with 84 people diagnosed with the disease. 10 children did not survive that outbreak, U Than Tun Aung added. ""Most of these children are ethnic minorities who come from areas where vaccines are not available, like conflict areas or places where transportation is difficult,"" he said.Continuous prevention programs in the form of vaccinations are organised by the government, both in and outside of Yangon. ""Yangon should be a primary area because there is a lot of migration,"" U Than Tun Aung said.In Shan, Rakhine, and Chin states, there is a lower uptake of booster vaccines, though public health data shows 90 per cent of children have been covered in vaccine programs.[byline: Shwe Yee Saw Myint]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The following was extracted from <http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/downloads/dip.pdf>:""_Corynebacterium diphtheriae_ is an aerobic Gram positive bacillus. Toxin production (toxigenicity) occurs only when the bacillus is itself infected (lysogenized) by a specific virus (bacteriophage) carrying the genetic information for the toxin (tox gene). Only toxigenic strains can cause severe disease. Culture of the organism requires selective media containing tellurite. If isolated, the organism must be distinguished in the laboratory from other _Corynebacterium_ species that normally inhabit the nasopharynx and skin (such as diphtheroids). _C. diphtheriae_ has 3 biotypes: gravis, intermedius, and mitis. The most severe disease is associated with the gravis biotype, but any strain may produce toxin. All isolates of _C. diphtheriae_ should be tested by the laboratory for toxigenicity.""Susceptible persons may acquire toxigenic diphtheria bacilli in the nasopharynx. The organism produces a toxin that inhibits cellular protein synthesis and is responsible for local tissue destruction and membrane formation. The toxin produced at the site of the membrane is absorbed into the bloodstream and then distributed to the tissues of the body. The toxin is responsible for the major complications of myocarditis and neuritis and can also cause low platelet counts (thrombocytopenia) and protein in the urine (proteinuria). Clinical disease associated with non-toxin-producing strains is generally milder. While rare severe cases have been reported, these may actually have been caused by toxigenic strains that were not detected because of inadequate culture sampling.""The incubation period of diphtheria is 2-5 days (range, 1-10 days). Disease can involve almost any mucous membrane. For clinical purposes, it is convenient to classify diphtheria into a number of manifestations, depending on the site of disease. The most common sites of diphtheria infection are the pharynx and the tonsils. Infection at these sites is usually associated with substantial systemic absorption of toxin. The onset of pharyngitis is insidious. Early symptoms include malaise, sore throat, anorexia, and low-grade fever. Within 2-3 days, a bluish-white membrane forms and extends, varying in size from covering a small patch on the tonsils to covering most of the soft palate. Often by the time a physician is contacted, the membrane is greyish-green, or black if bleeding has occurred. There is a minimal amount of mucosal erythema surrounding the membrane. The membrane is adherent to the tissue, and forcible attempts to remove it cause bleeding. Extensive membrane formation may result in respiratory obstruction.""The patient may recover at this point; or if enough toxin is absorbed, develop severe prostration, striking pallor, rapid pulse, stupor, and coma, and may even die within 6 to 10 days. Fever is usually not high, even though the patient may appear quite toxic. Patients with severe disease may develop marked edema of the submandibular areas and the anterior neck along with lymphadenopathy, giving a characteristic ""bull neck"" appearance.""Most complications of diphtheria, including death, are attributable to effects of the toxin. The severity of the disease and complications are generally related to the extent of local disease. The toxin, when absorbed, affects organs and tissues distant from the site of invasion. The most frequent complications of diphtheria are myocarditis and neuritis. Myocarditis may present as abnormal cardiac rhythms and can occur early in the course of the illness or weeks later, and can lead to heart failure. If myocarditis occurs early, it is often fatal. Neuritis most often affects motor nerves and usually resolves completely. Paralysis of the soft palate is most frequent during the 3rd week of illness. Paralysis of eye muscles, limbs, and diaphragm can occur after the 5th week. Secondary pneumonia and respiratory failure may result from diaphragmatic paralysis. Other complications include otitis media and respiratory insufficiency due to airway obstruction, especially in infants."" - Mod.LLMaps of Myanmar can be seen at <http://www.nationsonline.org/maps/myanmar_map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/148>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
