DNAinfo [edited]<https://www.dnainfo.com/chicago/20160613/clearing/lead-levels-highest-yet-at-15th-cps-school-test-positive>A 15th school has tested positive for lead in its water at the highest levels seen yet at Chicago Public Schools [CPS].Blair Early Childhood Center in Clearing serves children 3 to 6 years old and had one classroom sink with lead levels as high as 1100 parts per billion [ppb]. The 1.1 milligrams of lead per liter of water tests well above the federal standard of 15 parts per billion. A total of 18 samples of water from Blair, 6751 W. 63rd Place, tested above the 15 ppb line. The water was tested 28 May 2016. Dozens of other samples had some amount of lead, but below the Environmental Protection Agency's allowed limit.Blair joins 14 other schools at CPS with levels of lead in the water above 15 ppb. The district is testing 324 schools built before 1986 with pre-kindergarten classrooms, which are considered more vulnerable and a priority for the district-wide testing. So far, 1 in 5 have tested positive, with hundreds of samples left to test. However, many schools testing positive have had a single source of water testing above 15 ppb.The latest results come as Chicago aldermen called for public hearings on the matter on Mon [13 Jun 2016]. Ald. Christopher Taliaferro (29th) said he demanded answers on what CPS is doing to clear its water of lead. ""In 2016, it is outrageous that we must face the risk of putting our children in harm's way by sending them to school,"" Taliaferro said. ""We know how to get rid of lead ... so that it is present in our schools must be unacceptable to us.""CPS also shared more details regarding several other recently tested schools. Reilly Elementary in Avondale was retested on Wed [8 Jun 2016], addressing concerns that it might have gotten a false positive due to the water not being used in several days at the school. Wednesday's test, though, showed 9 samples exceeding the government limits for safe water. 1 sample tested at 354 ppb. At Beasley Elementary in Washington Park, lead samples came close to those found at Blair. 2 samples from a classroom sink tested at 950 and 96 ppb, while 2 more tested above 400 ppb.CPS pledged to test the vulnerable schools before [21 Jun 2016], with the remaining 60 percent of schools getting tested next school year.[The following information is available at the source URL above:- schools that have been tested with no lead found (21);- schools already tested with no lead levels above 15 ppb (13);- schools that have been tested but results have not been made public yet (results take up to 10 days to process); and- 85 vulnerable schools that will be tested before classes end (21 Jun 2016);]All other schools will be tested next year, CPS said.[Byline: Ariel Cheung]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[While finances is always a concern, and testing costs money, waiting till next budget cycle may make sense. However, given the levels being found and the number of children and teachers at risk of suffering some measure of lead intoxication, it does not seem like a wise move to wait. It may open the school district up to law suits if children are found with lead levels while the district waited a longer time to test the water.In reference to the different lavatories and drinking fountains, I wonder if there is any correlation in models or age to those that are having higher lead tests? Could it have lead linings or fittings? Either this is a systemic issue (city wide?) or this involves pipes with the fixture or those leading to the fixtures. Hopefully the authorities can track down the situation and determine if it is only the pipes or there is a more systemic issue.Lead poisoning occurs when lead builds up in the body, often over a period of months or years. Even small amounts of lead can cause serious health problems. Children under the age of 6 (who are generally too young to be in the schools) are especially vulnerable to lead poisoning, which can severely affect mental and physical development. At very high levels, lead poisoning can be fatal.Lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust in older buildings are the commonest sources of lead poisoning in children. Other sources include contaminated air, water and soil. Adults who work with batteries, do home renovations or work in auto repair shops also may be exposed to lead.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/basics/definition/con-20035487>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/520>.]
