Hindustan Times [edited]<http://www.hindustantimes.com/ranchi/194-children-fall-ill-in-jharkhand-after-eating-midday-meals/story-zAOs8iAdF49kSf2x4cpT2N.html>At least 194 children fell ill after eating midday meal in a government school in Jharkhand's Godda district on [Wed 8 Jun 2016].The incident occurred days after 90 children fell sick after consuming midday meal, allegedly infected by [a] lizard, at Chilga upgraded middle school in Giridih's Jamua block. Since January [2016], more than 350 students in Jharkhand have fallen ill after having midday meal in schools.Reports said the Godda schoolchildren were given eggs and banana after the meal. Minutes later, they complained of vomiting, lip burning, itching, and headache. They were rushed to the hospital in Godda for check-up.After getting the information, parents reached the school and took the teacher hostage in protest. Police had to intervene to control the situation from going out of control.After preliminary check-up, hospital authorities admitted 24 children and released others. Hospital doctor Anant Kumar Jha said the symptoms suggested that the banana were ripened using a heavy quantity of a chemical called carbide.""We would be able to comment further after properly examining the children,"" he said.Parents said DDT was sprayed on the school campus 2 days ago to kill parasites. They doubt even that could have gone into the meals accidentally and affected the children.School principal Dilip Gupta said: ""We all are shocked and widely confused. It is very important for us to know the cause that took the children ill.""Superintendent of police Sanjiv Kumar said, an inquiry committee had been set up to ascertain the reason of the contamination of the food that led to the sickness.To provide quality midday meal, the state school education and literacy department plans to rope in [gather] public sector units and private firms.These firms will prepare quality midday meal and deliver it packaged to their respective schools. The state also plans to create a midday meal authority to monitor the functioning of centralised kitchens.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Maps of India can be seen at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/53691>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJThe issue of the use of DDT is likely not connected with the illness the children experienced. The clinical signs mentioned in the article are consistent with calcium carbide, ethylene and acetylene, ripening agents used in the fruit industry. When too much calcium carbide is used, people handling and consuming the fruit may be affected. Likewise nutrients from the fruit are lost because of these chemicals.Possibly the supplier of the fruit was unable to get the specific type of fruit (fresh ripe bananas) for the price specified in the contract. Consequently one method of delivering a product that appears to meet the visual requirements is to use chemical ripeners.Calcium carbide is used to ripen fruit prematurely or ahead of its natural cycle. A tray of mangos or bananas is covered with plastic and a small container of calcium carbide is placed under the plastic. The plastic causes the fruit to sweat, or produce moisture. The moisture combines with the calcium carbide to produce acetylene. Acetylene is known to cause some neurological signs.The following information has been extracted from (references omitted)Asif M: Physico-chemical properties and toxic effect of fruit-ripening agent calcium carbide. Ann Trop Med Public Health [serial online] 2012 [cited 2016 Jun 15]; 5: 150-6.The complete article is available from <http://www.atmph.org/text.asp?2012/5/3/150/98602>.Ripening is the final stage of the maturation process, when the fruit changes color, softens, and develops the flavor, texture, and aroma that constitute optimum eating quality. A study was conducted to discuss the use of unsatisfactory calcium carbide to ripen fruits for domestic markets as well as their toxic effects on human health. The commonly used ripening agents are calcium carbide, acetylene, ethylene, propylene, ethrel (2-chloroethyl phosphonic acid), glycol, ethanol, and some other agents. The calcium carbide is one of the most commonly used ripening agent for fruits, while other calcium salts like calcium ammonium nitrate, calcium chloride, and calcium sulfate are used to delay fruit ripening agents for local fruit industries. The use of calcium carbide is being discouraged worldwide, due to associated health hazards. Calcium carbide treatment of food is extremely hazardous because it contains traces of arsenic and phosphorous, and once dissolved in water, it produces acetylene gas. Arsenic, phosphorous, and acetylene gas may affect the different body organs and causes various health problems like headache, dizziness, mood disturbances, sleepiness, mental confusion, memory loss, cerebral edema, seizures, and prolonged hypoxia.Ethylene glycol, when diluted with water, can ripen various fruits faster than the regular ripening rate of the fruits, in particular colder climatic conditions. Water does not take away the effects of ethylene glycol in the ripening of fruits. Ethanol can potentially be used to localize ripe fruit, and consumption of low-concentration ethanol within fruit may act as a feeding stimulant. Ethanol is a naturally occurring substance resulting from the fermentation by yeast of fruit sugars. Ethylene is a flammable colorless gas with a sweet odor. Ethylene is a naturally occurring plant hormone that is produced by many fruits and vegetables. It affects the physiological processes in plants and initiates the ripening process when internal concentrations increase from 0.1 to 1.0 ppm (parts per million). Externally applied ethylene can also initiate the ripening process.There has been considerable research in the literature concerning the action of acetylene, ethylene and propylene on the ripening processes of fruits in both normal and chilled fruits and vegetables. Under certain conditions, it would appear that both of these gases are capable of hastening the ripening of some fruits, whether the action of these gases is due to the fact that they are unsaturated compounds. The experiments reported that the ""carbide treatment"" hastens the ripening processes of fruits and vegetables in both favorable and unfavorable conditions such as chilling. These effects are due to acetylene rather than ammonia or some other impurity. Calcium carbide is known to cause cancer and also causes food poisoning, gastric irritation and mouth ulcers. According to scientists, when calcium carbide comes in contact with moisture in the atmosphere, it produces acetylene gas, which like ethylene accelerates the ripening process. Research literature indicates that ethrel/ethephon (2-chloroethylphosphonic acid) and ethanol are the 2 potential chemicals that can be used to ripen fruits. On application, these chemicals penetrate into the fruit and decompose into ethylene. While there are only few reports about the effectiveness of ethephon as a ripening agent, ethanol (70 percent ethanol) is being used for ripening fruit.On the other hand, fruits and vegetables have poor storage qualities, and technologies for long-term storage such as controlled or modified atmosphere have not been applied successfully to these fruits and vegetables. They stored in modified atmosphere often show undesirable characteristics, that is, poor color, poor eating quality, and presence of undesirable flavors. So, to solve the problem of short shelf-life of fruits and vegetables, different chemicals are used to delay the ripening. Although calcium carbide has been frequently used since long times to enhance ripening process of fruits, however, some other calcium salts especially calcium chloride (CaCl2*2H2O), calcium sulfate (CaSO4*2H2O) or calcium ammonium nitrate Ca(NH4NO3)2 have been reported in literature to delay the ripening and senescence in fruits by lowering the respiration rate. The calcium salts in different concentrations have either been used as pre-harvest sprays or infiltrated into harvested fruits, while some workers treated the harvested fruits by immersing in calcium solution for varying times. These calcium salts maintain organoleptic properties (like skin color, skin shriveling, aroma, pulp color, flavor and taste) of the fruits for long duration as compared with control ripening. Therefore, different concentrations of various calcium salts (that is, calcium chloride, calcium sulfate and calcium ammonium nitrate) were used to ascertain their effects on delaying the ripening and eating quality of fruits.The experiments reported that the ""calcium carbide (CaC2)"" treatment hastens the ripening processes of unripe fruits as shown by the rates of softening, respiration, flavor, and color changes. Calcium carbide is mostly used for ripening of fruit; while, its use is being discouraged worldwide, due to associated health hazards. Secondly, calcium carbide (CaC2) is the commonly used chemical for ripening of fruits, due to its low price and availability in local market; however, use of this chemical in fruit industry is being discouraged worldwide due to dangers of explosion and carryover of toxic materials like arsenic and phosphorus to consumers, thus making the healthy fruit poisonous. Since no technical knowledge is considered necessary for its anomalous use, higher quantity of calcium carbide needed to ripen immature fruit makes them tasteless. In view of the above problems, studies for an alternate ripening agent for fruit were imperative. Further, the local industry is also looking to replace calcium carbide with any suitable alternate. Calcium carbide absorbs moisture and produces acetylene, which is a weak analog of ethylene, responsible for triggering ripening process. Today or in future we will be able find out some better alternatives for fruit ripening agents that have minimal or are without health hazards.Experts stated that calcium carbide is often used by fruit vendors to ripen fruits like apples, mangoes, bananas, papayas etc. Calcium carbide is inexpensive, easy to transport, and easy to use in comparison to other 'ripening' chemicals.Calcium carbide is a dangerous and corrosive chemical compound, it causes various side effects on human health.- Ingestion: it causes digestive, respiratory and gastrointestinal tract burns, nausea, vomiting, bloating, and headache.- Skin contact: calcium carbide may cause severe skin irritation, rash, burning feeling, redness, with possible burns. Its contact with skin causes irritation and possible burns, especially if the skin is wet or moist. When in contact with moist skin, caustic lime is formed, which can lead to ulceration and scarring. Repeated/prolonged skin contact may cause dryness or rashes.- Inhalation: mouth, nose, throat, and lung irritation with coughing and severe shortness of breath (pulmonary edema), rapid irregular breathing, headache, and burns to mucous membranes. May cause severe irritation of the upper respiratory tract with pain, burns, inflammation and can produce delayed pulmonary edema. Repeated inhalation may cause chronic bronchitis.Physical findings in arsenic toxicity vary with age and dose. Any combination of GI complaints, neurologic dysfunction, and anemia should prompt a search for arsenic toxicity. GI complaints predominate in adults. Children are more prone to CNS dysfunction, including encephalopathy. Encephalopathy is rare in adults. Encephalopathy may present as an acute event with seizures, or it may develop slowly over weeks to months with variable nonspecific complaints. Cholera-like diarrhea can be seen in acute arsenic toxicity. Neurologic complaints ranging from neuropathy to encephalopathy have been reported in cases of acute arsenic toxicity. Arsenic toxicity presenting as ascending flaccid paralysis is often.Phosphorus is pentavalent in combination with oxygen, as phosphate (PO4 3-). The toxicity of phosphorus in humans focuses on accidental or intentional ingestion of the more toxic forms of phosphorus that are not found in food or food supplements (elemental yellow phosphorus). No human data on chronic toxicity of dietary forms of phosphorus were identified in the literature. The predominant adverse reaction to orally administered phosphorus (as various phosphate salts) in human supplementation studies is osmotic diarrhea, which has been reported at intakes of 750 mg/day and above. Other mild gastrointestinal effects, including nausea and vomiting have been noted in some studies. There are a limited number of studies on the oral toxicity of phosphate salts in laboratory animals. Kidney lesions have been reported in rats by acute doses of phosphates. Pathological effects in the parathyroids, kidneys and bone have also been reported in subchronic studies at high doses. No adverse effects on growth and reproduction were reported. No data on carcinogenicity or genotoxicity of dietary forms of inorganic phosphorus and phosphate salts were identified. One study suggested that increased phosphorus intake may lead to increased bone resorption in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. However, a study in postmenopausal women found no biochemical evidence of increased bone remodelling as a result of supplementation with phosphorus. Black and Asian people and older people may be susceptible to bone resorption as a result of high phosphorus intakes, as they are more susceptible to hypovitaminosis D, which decreases the absorption of calcium, and phosphorus has been shown to influence the parathyroid-vitamin D axis, causing an increase in serum calcium levels via bone resorption.The fast ripening of fruits means they may contain various harmful properties. A commonly used agent in the ripening process is calcium carbide, a material most commonly used for welding purposes. Calcium carbide treatment of food is extremely hazardous because it contains traces of heavy metal arsenic and phosphorous. The calcium carbide produces acetylene gas when react with water. Acetylene gas may affect the neurological system by inducing prolonged hypoxia. Calcium carbide causes various health hazards like, headache, dizziness, mood disturbances, sleepiness, mental confusion, memory loss, cerebral edema and seizures. These results indicate that fruit treatment with calcium salts not only affects the ripening process but also influences the aroma of the fruits. The commonly used ripening agents other than calcium carbide are acetylene, ethylene, propylene, ethrel (2-chloroethyl phosphonic acid), glycol, ethanol and some other agents. The calcium carbide is one of the most commonly used ripening agent for fruits while other calcium salts like calcium ammonium nitrate, calcium chloride, and calcium sulphate are used to delay fruit ripening agents for local fruit industries.- Mod.TG][There have been numerous posts on ProMED-SoAs: South Asia (archive numbers 20160520.4232738, 20160506.4205739, 20160322.4109159, 20160205.3997120, 20160114.3929158, 20160108.3920062, etc.) about foodborne illness in different states in India, associated with the Mid-Day Meal Scheme, a government school meal program designed to improve the nutritional status of school-age children nationwide (<http://mhrd.gov.in/mid-day-meal>). This mid-day meal may be the children's only food for the day. The program is one of the largest food assistance programs in the world. In the decentralised model of the program, meals are cooked on-site by local cooks and helpers or self-help groups; in the centralised model, an external organisation cooks and delivers the meal to schools, mostly through public-private partnerships (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Midday_Meal_Scheme#Implementation_models>). Problems have occurred with both models that involve, for example, inadequate hygiene in food preparation, contamination (e.g., pesticide, lizards, insects, ""washing powder"") of the mid-day meals, poor nutritional quality, caste discrimination, and corruption (<http://www.dnaindia.com/india/comment-lack-of-monitoring-corruption-plague-mid-day-meal-scheme-1866691> and <http://www.voicesofyouth.org/en/posts/poor-implementation-of-midday-meal-scheme-in-india>). - Mod.ML/Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]]
