Scientific Reports [edited]<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4893621/>Turner WC, Kausrud KL, Beyer W, et al. Lethal exposure: An integrated approach to pathogen transmission via environmental reservoirs. Sci Rep. 2016; 6, 27311; doi: 10.1038/srep27311.Abstract----------To mitigate the effects of zoonotic diseases on human and animal populations, it is critical to understand what factors alter transmission dynamics. Here we assess the risk of exposure to lethal concentrations of the anthrax bacterium, _Bacillus anthracis_ (BA), for grazing animals in a natural system over time through different transmission mechanisms. We follow pathogen concentrations at anthrax carcass sites and waterholes for 5 years and estimate infection risk as a function of grass, soil or water intake, age of carcass sites, and the exposure required for a lethal infection. Grazing, not drinking seems the dominant transmission route, and transmission is more probable from grazing at carcass sites 1-2 years of age. Unlike most studies of virulent pathogens that are conducted under controlled conditions for extrapolation to real situations, we evaluate exposure risk under field conditions to estimate the probability of a lethal dose, showing that not all reservoirs with detectable pathogens are significant transmission pathways.Discussion [edited]-------------------With this study we have shown that carcass sites are more likely to be important sources of host-pathogen contacts than water sources. At carcass sites, a spike in the probability of contacting a lethal dose (LD) occurs at exposures between 105-106 spores, and persists for the length of the dataset. This spike is observed whether hosts ingest purely above-ground biomass or also a portion of roots and soil. At carcass sites of ages 0-2 years, individuals grazing there are very likely to ingest large doses of BA spores, even if very little grass is consumed. The probability of lethal exposures declines with time yet is still not insignificant even at lower probabilities, given that these sites are frequently visited and grazed by herbivores. This may contribute to endemic cycles or to annual spillover events, where smaller outbreaks occur in the years following a large outbreak. The exposure model suggests that any grazing at carcass sites in year 0 is very likely to result in death, unless the LD is very high and very little grass is consumed. Thus, the main factor decreasing the importance of year 0 transmissions may be the denuding of grass biomass associated with scavenging of the carcass, since anthrax mortalities in Etosha peak toward the end of the rains and sites may remain bare of vegetation until the following rainy season. Transmission seems likely to be most frequent in years 1-2 when grass regeneration has occurred and BA concentrations remain substantial. Transmission in years 3-4 is comparatively less likely, suggesting that the main effect of an anthrax outbreak on host populations will be with a lag of 1-2 years, producing a delayed density response on their population dynamics.Variation in pathogen persistence in the environment can strongly influence outbreak dynamics and frequency. Thus, the rate of decay in spore concentrations may influence the between-outbreak interval among systems. In areas with sporadic outbreaks, a decade or more can pass between subsequent outbreaks. It is difficult to predict how carcass sites may drive outbreaks in systems with such large inter-outbreak dynamics. In general, anthrax outbreaks have been linked to rainfall extremes. One may hypothesize that shortly after death rainfall increases transmission events by encouraging grass regrowth and foraging at carcass sites, but that as years pass and little BA is found on grasses, drought might increase the risk of restarting an epidemic from old carcass sites if depleted biomass leads herbivores to ingest more soil when foraging. Thus, old carcass sites may only sporadically contribute cases that are negligible during active infection cycles but that could restart an outbreak years after the disease had seemingly disappeared locally.Water sources show a much lower potential to transmit lethal infections than carcass sites. Seasonal water sources held significantly higher concentrations of BA in sediments than did perennial sources; however, these concentrations were still orders of magnitude below those observed at carcass sites. Water sources are likely to contribute lethal exposures only with a combination of i) an extremely high water intake, ii) a very high transfer rate (which probably varies with animal behavior) and iii) if the threshold for a lethal infection is considerably lower than previously thought. Etosha is an example of a system that should have the greatest potential for drinking-based transmission of BA. Point water sources aggregate hosts and have the potential to aggregate the pathogen as well, whereas streams or rivers have a lower potential to aggregate host and pathogen for transmission. Thus, ingestion of contaminated water may not be a significant transmission pathway for BA across systems. An exception to this may occur for semi-aquatic species such as hippos that exhibit considerably different risk behaviors for water-borne transmission.One surprising result of this study is that concentrations of BA on roots and root-associated soils seemed to increase 2 years after death, a pattern seen across sampling years, while concentrations in other sample types exhibited the expected decay over time. Why such a response would be observed 2 years after death, and not in the 1st growing season, is unknown. Despite great interest in Van Ness's incubator area hypothesis proposing BA replication occurs in the environment, and what role an off-host growth phase would play in epidemiology, BA replication in the environment has so far not been detected. Recent experiments do demonstrate interactions between BA and grasses, evidence that the pathogen may have a far more complex lifecycle in the environment that previously understood. However, future research is required to determine mechanisms behind this observed increase in BA (e.g., soil-water dynamics aggregating spores around plant roots or BA population growth), and what role BA may have in the grass rhizosphere and soil microbial community.For environmentally transmitted pathogens, there are several challenges that currently prevent a full understanding of the sources of transmission heterogeneity and their role in disease dynamics. From the pathogen perspective, the outcomes of host-pathogen contacts may be binary (infections continue or not), but the threshold is a moving target. In this paper and in the existing dose-response literature for gastrointestinal anthrax, dose is considered as a one-time event. However, immune signatures of sublethal exposures are observed in nature, and we can therefore expect that animals in endemic areas will encounter low dose, non-lethal exposures. The complexities of individual dose size during exposure to a single infectious site versus the total dose acquired over time in sequential exposures remains unknown on disease outcomes for gastrointestinal anthrax. In _Cryptosporidium parvum_, for example, as length of exposure time increases, the probability of infection decreases, even with variable dose magnitudes. Thus sequential low-dose pathogen exposures could increase the threshold for a lethal exposure in endemic versus sporadic disease systems. These complexities highlight how disease management may be hindered, if based on simple pathogen presence/absence studies or unrealistic dose-response relationships of little relevance to natural systems.Our analysis encompasses a systems-level approach to meet challenges in studying transmission of an environmental and zoonotic disease. Crucial epidemiological and risk-relevant data are hard to come by for highly controlled pathogens like BA, because there are obvious limitations to studying environmentally transmitted diseases solely in laboratory settings. Hence, the study of unmanaged BA in its natural habitat offers otherwise inaccessible insights into the world of virulent zoonotic diseases. Our study quantifies exposure risk in a heterogeneous environment, which is a crucial step in risk assessment, but our study also has further implications. For example, coupling surveillance-based data on mortality, immunology, and host movement with the exposure estimates presented here will allow us to approach the dose-response equations without animal experiments. Fortunately, with the emergence of cheaper and quicker molecular tools, increasing density of remotely sensed data and computing power, the data-intensive and cross-disciplinary work needed to achieve what amounts to microbial population dynamics in real systems is increasingly feasible. Thus, the approach used in our study takes a pathogen-centric view of the epidemiology of environmental diseases, leading to a deeper ecological understanding of outbreak dynamics, which should lead to better risk assessment and disease management. This is important for using intervention resources effectively to target the most important transmission pathways; in our example, grazing at carcass sites 0-2 years after death as opposed to drinking at waterholes.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This is an admirable paper based on ongoing outbreaks in the Etosha National Park in Namibia, and soil samples taken from 41 adult dead Zebra carcass sites from 2010-2014. The samples were first collected 0-2 months after each animal's death and thereafter annually during the peak anthrax mortality season. We need more studies like this as each answer raises 2 new questions, some of which have to be tackled in a different place with a different ecology.Their finding that the 1st ""2 years"" is the most dangerous period for new outbreaks echoes something said to me at the beginning of my 1st anthrax investigation 45 years ago. I had been told by my director, Ivor Field, to sort out the acute anthrax recurrence cases at the Compton Research Institute. After my 1st walk around I went down to the main building to report to the Compton director and found him talking to a visitor. I was introduced. It was Max Stern. And inter alia Max said to me that in his experience with anthrax in Natal in the '30s he found that pasture sites stayed infective for 3 months to 3 years. This paper confirms what Max said and many peoples' similar experiences. I had the privilege of knowing Max for many years.This confirms why it is necessary to vaccinate the affected herd immediately after an outbreak and re-vaccinate them annually at least 2 more times as all they will be re-exposed over the following 24 months at least.Contaminated water from bathing buzzards & vultures is more immediate hazard and most likely if they had been bathing in a cattle water trough, which can be miles away from where they had been feeding on an infected carcass, and not a pond. In Texas we have been able to show trough contamination in the sediment within 3 months after the affected cow had died and been eviscerated by turkey buzzards. Later samples were negative. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/163>.]
