PLoS Negl Trop Dis [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0004769>Reiter P. Control of Urban Zika Vectors: Should We Return to the Successful PAHO/WHO Strategy? PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016; 10(6): e0004769. doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0004769We keep hearing that vector control is our only weapon against Zika. The problem is: How?We assume that the urban vectors of the virus are _Aedes aegypti _ and _Ae. albopictus_. They are also the principal vectors of urban dengue and chikungunya, in which case the spectacular increase in the global prevalence and incidence of both diseases is harsh condemnation of our current control strategies. The stark truth is that over the past 50 years no country anywhere in the world (with the possible exception of Singapore) can claim sustained suppression of transmission of these viruses.A plethora of factors has been blamed: explosive growth of urban areas, globalization of pathogens and vectors, limited government resources, excessive reliance on insecticides, ineffectual application technology, incorrect application methods, insecticide resistance, poor training of field personnel, the ""throw-away society"", a ""quick fix"" mentality, inadequate garbage collection, irregular water supply, inadequate public education and overemphasis on the ""top down"" role of governments rather than the ""bottom up"" role of the community, and more.In the past, nevertheless, there were 2 remarkable examples of success: the source-reduction campaigns that began at the turn of the 20th century, and the _Ae. aegypti_ Eradication Campaign -- coordinated by the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO) -- that followed in the late 1940s. The goal of the latter was complete eradication of the species from the entire western hemisphere and indeed, by 1962, 18 countries had been declared totally free of the mosquito and of dengue. Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons -- including insecticide resistance and failure to sustain efforts in regions where the campaign had been successful -- the project was abandoned and both mosquito and virus quickly regained their lost territory.The challenges that confronted the eradication campaign are dwarfed by the obstacles that we face today. The problem is primarily urban: _Ae. aegypti_ is ubiquitous and abundant in urban areas throughout the tropics. In addition, in the past 30 years, _Ae. albopictus_ has invaded many tropical and temperate regions world-wide.To understand the abundance of both we must be mindful of their origins as forest species. In that habitat they did not breed in ground-pools or marshlands but in a well-defined niche: tree-holes, plant axils, fruit husks, rock-holes and other small natural containers. They have adopted the human peri-domestic environment by exploiting the profusion of artificial containers in the human jungle -- water storage vessels, discarded tires, blocked gutters, broken china, cracked buckets, defunct toilet bowls, saucers under flowerpots, flower vases, water-storage vessels, abandoned kiddie play-pens and so on.In the period 1950-2014 the world's urban population rose from 746 million to 3.9 billion. Much of this growth was in the tropics; 80 percent of the populations of Latin America and the Caribbean, for example, now live in urban areas and in most of the region they share their habitat with one or both _Aedes_ species. Compared to their forest ancestors, these mosquitoes live in a burgeoning paradise, and the obstacles to significant control, even on a small scale, would appear insurmountable.I believe that the spectacular success of the PAHO campaign can be attributed to a single aspect of the behavior of the mosquitoes: female _Ae. aegypti _do not lay ""all their eggs in one basket"". Instead, they ""skip oviposit""--small numbers of eggs (often only a single egg) at many sites. In the field they will lay 60-80 eggs per gonotrophic cycle and thus must visit many sites. This behavior may be a strategy to avoid overcrowding in a niche where larval nutrition is limited, and/or to minimize risks inherent in temporary sites.In the eradication campaign, the principal approach was ""perifocal"" treatment: field operators searched for infested containers and sprayed them plus surrounding surfaces to a diameter of about one meter [3 ft] with DDT. Residual treatments of this kind kill mosquitoes by contact.Infested containers are remarkably hard to detect, even by the most diligent persons. Faced with a dreary routine of search-and-find, field-workers would inevitably have missed many sites, particularly those not in the usual categories (top on my list of such ""specials"" include the baptismal font in a church and the insides of a metal sculpture). Thus it is inconceivable that every container in all those countries was located and treated. On the other hand, with ""skip oviposition"", even if only a portion of infested sites was treated, there would have been a high probability that females would encounter a treated site; they were engaged in Russian Roulette with multiple bullets.In the current Zika pandemic, the media repeatedly show ""fogging machines"" mounted on road vehicles and/or troops of workers on the ground ""space-spraying"" residential areas with insecticidal aerosols. The impact of such treatments is ephemeral at best because they are mainly effective while the droplets remain airborne, a matter of minutes. By contrast, peri-focal treatments with a residual insecticide could create numerous lethal sites that remain active for several months and actually lure the egg-laying female.I believe we should consider a return to peri-focal treatments. DDT is not an option (although it is now re-approved by the World Health Organisation (WHO) for mosquito control in certain circumstances) but novel formulations of other insecticides are available that may serve the same purpose. In one such product, tiny crystals of deltamethrin are embedded in a patented liquid polymer that dries to a stable, rain- and sun-proof lattice. According to the manufacturers, treatments remain effective by slow release of the insecticide for at least 3 months. Field trials of indoor residual spray (treatment of the walls inside houses) have demonstrated good kill by this formulation but the approach is far more intrusive than focal treatments outdoors.Field trials to assess the viability of perifocal treatments could be completed in a matter of months. If results are favorable, the insecticide could be applied with widely-available hand-carried sprayers. Training requirements would be minimal and operators would not have to don the full-body suits used with hand-foggers; these are understandably disquieting to the public.I am not invoking a panacea for _Aedes_-borne urban disease but I suggest that a well-managed treatment-campaign, bolstered by community-based source reduction and other strategies, might well be as successful as was the PAHO campaign. In areas too large or too difficult to treat, triage to select potential hot-spots of transmission -- schools, hospitals, prisons, markets, outdoor caf̩s and restaurants and so on -- might at least help emergency services to cope by flattening the epidemic curve.The curse of such campaigns is, of course, sustainability -- it is hard to justify funding for a problem that no longer exists (although no-one questions the need for sustained garbage collection and other community services). In addition, long-term use of insecticides has several drawbacks, particularly the evolution of resistance. Happily, a number of exciting new approaches are in the pipeline -- transgenics with a dominant lethal gene, the release of strains infected with _Wolbachia_ bacteria, and auto-dissemination of juvenile hormone mimics -- although all are some way from mass application.Ultimately, vaccination may be the preferred weapon, particularly if combined with vector control, but vaccine development and approval takes time, generally a matter of years. The lesson of Zika is that other viruses may be waiting in the wings for which the same delays will apply.For this reason, the need for effective vector control will continue.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides a good background for the compelling need for vector control and an approach that could be taken now. - Mod.TY]******[3] Zika risk, EuropeDate: May 2016Source: WHO, Europe, Zika Virus Technical Report [edited]<http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/309981/Zika-Virus-Technical-report.pdf?ua=1>Interim Risk Assessment, WHO European RegionExecutive SummaryMethods-------The risk for an outbreak was considered to be the function of two main components: (1) the likelihood of local Zika virus transmission and (2) the capacity of countries to contain transmission at an early stage. A local transmission likelihood score was derived from the presence of and climatic suitability for _Aedes aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ (the two species of _Aedes_ mosquitos known to be competent vectors for Zika virus) and factors related to the introduction and onward transmission of Zika virus, such as a history of previous arboviral outbreaks, shipping and air connectivity, population density and urbanization. A country capacity score was derived by evaluating 4 main factors: integrated vector management, clinical surveillance, laboratory capacity and emergency risk communication.Results and conclusions-----------------------Many countries extending from the Mediterranean Basin are at moderate risk for local Zika virus transmission. In addition, 3 geographical areas (Madeira Island belonging to Portugal, and the Black Sea coastal areas of Georgia and the Russian Federation) with established populations of _Ae. Aegypti_, were classified as having high likelihood for local Zika virus transmission. Although there was good overall capacity in the Region to contain Zika virus transmission at an early stage, capacity reported for specific activities (integrated vector management, surveillance, laboratory and emergency risk communication) varied substantially at country level. Reported capacity to prevent and rapidly control Zika virus transmission was fairly robust in countries with localized areas of high transmission likelihood.Recommendations---------------Countries and regions at high or moderate likelihood of local Zika virus transmission should strengthen and/or maintain their vector control activities, with improved entomological surveillance and source reduction strategies. This will be particularly relevant in the 3 areas with _Ae. aegypti_ before the active mosquito season starts, with enhanced clinical surveillance to rapidly detect local Zika virus transmission. Further, countries are advised to ensure that they have the laboratory capacity to test for Zika virus or have protocols in place to ship samples abroad for testing. Lastly, it is recommended that countries advise populations at risk on protecting themselves against infection and mitigating the effects of Zika virus infection and its complications.--Communicated by:Roland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>******[4] Ocular findings, non-microcephalicsDate: Tue 7 Jun 2016Source: The Lancet [edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(16)30776-0.pdf>Ventura CV, Maia M, Dias N, Ventura LO, Belfort R Jr. Zika: neurological and ocular findings in infant without microcephaly. Lancet. 2016; Jun 7. pii: S0140-6736(16)30776-0. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30776-0In January, 2016, we reported ocular findings in infants with microcephaly and presumed congenital Zika virus infection in Pernambuco, Brazil. Similar ocular findings have been reported in infants assessed in Bahia, Brazil. These reports followed establishment of microcephaly (head circumference 2 SDs below the mean for age and sex) as an inclusion criterion for the screening of babies for congenital Zika virus infection. Therefore, the presence or absence of microcephaly was used as a cutoff for screening, and only cases that fulfilled this criterion were classified as presumed cases of congenital Zika virus infection and further investigated.To the best of our knowledge, no reports exist on infants with diagnosis of congenital Zika virus infection, who did not have microcephaly, but did have ocular findings. Here we report the ophthalmic findings of an infant (age at exam: 57 days; head circumference: 33 cm; weight at birth: 3500 g; gestational age at birth: 38 weeks) who was referred for ophthalmic examination by a neurologist for suspected congenital Zika virus infection. The mother reported that she did not have ZIKV-related symptoms, use illicit drugs, drink alcohol, or smoke during pregnancy.The infant presented lower limb and upper limb spasms at birth. CT scans detected cerebral calcifications in the basal ganglia, ventriculomegaly, and lissencephaly. Ocular examination included anterior segment biomicroscopy and fundus evaluation. A chorioretinal scar was detected on the macular region of the left eye similar to scars previously reported in congenital Zika virus infection.Toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, HIV, and dengue fever virus were ruled out in both mother and infant. IgM antibody capture (MAC)-ELISA for ZIKV was done in the cerebral spinal fluid of the infant, which was positive, confirming our hypothesis of congenital Zika virus infection.This case highlights that microcephaly should not be a required criterion for congenital Zika virus infection diagnosis, since infants without microcephaly could still have been infected by ZIKV during gestation. We emphasize the need for public health authorities to provide fundus screening to infants with suspected congenital Zika virus infection, because ocular findings might be underdiagnosed if microcephaly continues to be an inclusion criterion in the screening of this group of infants.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The lesions caused by congenital infections of fetuses by Zika virus continues to provide surprises. Microcephaly should not be an inclusion criterion for screening neonates for eye lesions. - Mod.TY][An interesting timeline of Zika virus from its discovery to recent outbreaks with associated diseases can be found at <http://in.reuters.com/article/health-zika-origin-timeline-idINKCN0YT2UZ>.On 7 Jun 2016, the WHO issued an Interim Guidance Update entitled Prevention of Sexual Transmission of Zika Virus <http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/204421/1/WHO_ZIKV_MOC_16.1_eng.pdf?ua=1>. It has an historical summary of known cases with modes of transmission and provides interim recommendations. ProMED thanks Roland Hubner for sending in this report. - Mod.TY]
