Saudi Arabia Ministry of Health [edited]<http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2016-06-17-001.aspx>As of 12:00 noon today [17 Jun 2016] there have been a total of:1404 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including:593 deaths [reported case fatality rate 42.2 percent]790 recoveries21 currently active cases (including 13 asymptomatic infections)In the past 24 hours there have been:11 newly confirmed infections with MERS-CoV0 newly reported fatalities0 newly reported recoveriesInformation on newly confirmed MERS-CoV infections.1- A 30-year-old expat female from Riyadh, healthcare worker, reported to be asymptomatic. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a healthcare worker.2- A 36-year-old expat female from Riyadh, healthcare worker, reported to be asymptomatic. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a healthcare worker.3- A 35-year-old expat female from Riyadh, healthcare worker, reported to be asymptomatic. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a healthcare worker.4- A 59-year-old expat female from Riyadh, healthcare worker, reported to be asymptomatic. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a healthcare worker.5- A 33-year-old expat female from Riyadh, healthcare worker, reported to be asymptomatic. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a healthcare worker.6- A 51-year-old expat male from Riyadh, healthcare worker, reported to be in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a healthcare worker.7- A 69-year-old Saudi female from Riyadh, non-healthcare worker, reported to be in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a patient.8- A 51-year-old Saudi female from Riyadh, non-healthcare worker, reported to be asymptomatic. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a patient.9- A 61-year-old Saudi female from Riyadh, non-healthcare worker, reported to be asymptomatic. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a patient.10- A 77-year-old Saudi male from Riyadh, non-healthcare worker, reported to be asymptomatic. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired infection in a patient.11- A 48-year-old Saudi male from Taif, non-healthcare worker, reported to be in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of symptoms.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[In the past 24 hours there have been 11 newly confirmed MERS-CoV infections. Of these 11 cases, 8 are reported to be asymptomatic -- 5 healthcare workers and 3 patients with presumed contact with previously confirmed case(s). The remaining 3 newly confirmed infected individuals are reported to be in stable condition -- 2 are also patients with presumed contact with an infected individual, and 1 is reported to be a primary infection in an individual from Taif with known history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of symptoms. All but one of the newly reported cases were reported from Riyadh.As mentioned yesterday, there are 2 recently reported MERS-CoV infected individuals in Riyadh, and a 3rd patient in relatively nearby Alkharj who may have been the index case(s) -- all 3 were classified as primary cases with no known history of contact with other MERS-CoV infected individuals.In yesterday's update there were 5 newly reported infections, all asymptomatic in Riyadh -- 2 in healthcare workers and 3 in household contacts. Hence there are presently 13 newly confirmed asymptomatic infections associated with one or more cases in Riyadh, suggesting a probable ""superspreader"". The number of asymptomatically infected individuals is impressive -- one wonders if their contacts outside of the hospital environment are being tested to address the question of transmission capabilities of asymptomatic infected individuals. One also wonders what proportion of the currently asymptomatic infected individuals may progress to symptomatic disease. We await further information on the results of epidemiologic and laboratory evaluations ongoing in Riyadh. If it is demonstrated that the asymptomatic infections are capable of transmission to others, this may explain the ""primary"" cases with no known history of contact with known confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection.A map showing the location of Riyadh and Taif can be found at the source URL.The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/131>. - Mod.MPP]
