WNDU, Michigan Department of Health and Human Services report [edited]<http://www.wndu.com/content/news/Cass-County-child-diagnosed-with-Rocky-Mountain-spotted-fever-383277051.html>Cass County child diagnosed with Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF)------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services (MDHHS) has confirmed a case of Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) in a child in Cass County. This is the 1st confirmed case of RMSF contracted in Michigan since 2009.RMSF is a tick-borne disease caused by the bacterium _Rickettsia rickettsii_, and can be fatal if not treated promptly and correctly, even in previously healthy people. Symptoms typically include fever, abdominal pain, vomiting and [severe] muscle pain. A characteristic rash may develop a few days later. The rash typically consists of small, flat, pink, non-itchy spots on the wrists, forearms, and ankles that spreads to include the trunk, and sometimes the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. However, some people never develop the rash, or the rash may have an atypical appearance.""Like all tick-borne illnesses, the best way to protect yourself against Rocky Mountain spotted fever is to prevent tick bites,"" said Dr. Eden Wells, chief medical executive of the MDHHS. ""Let your doctor know right away if you develop signs of illness such as fever, rash, or body aches in the days after a tick bite or potential exposure. Early detection and treatment are essential to preventing serious health complications.""RMSF can be challenging to diagnose because it can mimic other common diseases. Early treatment is essential to preventing serious complications, including death. If RMSF if suspected, the antimicrobial doxycycline is the 1st line treatment for both adults and children, and should be initiated immediately.There are a number of ticks in the USA that can transmit RMSF including the American dog tick, _Dermacentor variabilis_, which is the most common tick encountered in Michigan. Other ticks that transmit the disease outside of Michigan are the Rocky Mountain wood tick, _Dermacentor andersoni_, and the brown dog tick, _Rhipicephalus sanguineus_.Residents can protect themselves by using the following tips to prevent tick bites:- Avoiding tick-infested areas. This is especially important in the spring and summer in Michigan. If you are in tick-infested areas, walk in the center of trails to avoid contact with overgrown grass, brush, and leaf litter at trail edges. Dogs and cats can come into contact with ticks outdoors and bring them into the home, so using tick prevention products on pets is recommended.- Using insect repellent. Apply repellent containing DEET (20-30 percent) or Picaridin on exposed skin. You can also treat clothes (especially pants, socks, and shoes) with permethrin, which kills ticks on contact, or buy clothes that are pre-treated. Permethrin can also be used on tents and some camping gear. Do not use permethrin directly on skin. Always follow the manufacturer's instructions when applying any repellents.- Bathing or showering. Bathe or shower as soon as possible after coming indoors (preferably within 2 hours) to wash off and more easily find ticks that are crawling on you. Ticks can get a ride indoors on your clothes. After being outdoors, dry clothing should be tumble dried in a dryer on high heat for 10 minutes to kill ticks. If the clothes are damp, additional time may be needed. If the clothes require washing 1st, hot water is recommended. The clothes should be warm and completely dry when finished.- Performing daily tick checks. Always check for ticks on yourself and your animals after being outdoors, even in your own yard. Inspect all body surfaces carefully, and remove attached ticks with tweezers. Grasp the tick firmly and as closely to the skin as possible. With a steady motion, pull the tick's body away from the skin. Do not be alarmed if the tick's mouthparts remain in the skin. Cleanse the area with an antiseptic.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is vital to diagnose rickettsial infection promptly to minimize morbidity and mortality. In states such as Michigan, where the disease is less endemic than the Middle Atlantic states, it is particularly important to think of this infection.When the female tick harboring the organism attaches to a passing human, she usually starts low on the body after transferring from grassy vegetation or even directly or indirectly from a dog. After crawling around on clothes seeking an appropriate cutaneous site (wearing white clothes makes a wandering tick easier to spot), she attaches and begins to feed.If not already partially fed, after attaching, it generally takes 24 hours to activate and transmit the rickettsial organism. For this reason, daily or twice-daily tick checks with removal will minimize disease transmission. Ticks that attach in hairy areas such as the scalp or beard may be more difficult to find.The incubation period of the disease is about a week after the tick exposure, long after the tick has detached. The presenting illness is generally nonspecific, fever, muscle pains, headache (but the headache is usually described as quite severe). The rash begins on day 3 of the illness, initially maculopapular at the wrists and ankles before becoming petechial and purpuric, involving the palms and soles as well as spreading proximally to the trunk. Purpura usually are not seen before the 6th day of illness. The mortality is indeed quite low if treatment (usually a tetracycline) is begun during the 1st 2 days of the rash or before.Empiric treatment for this infection should always be begun in people with compatible symptoms inhabiting endemic areas during the spring and summer, even if no tick bite is known.The early rash of this disease can be seen at <http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d2/Rocky_Mountain_spotted_fever_PHIL_1962_lores.jpg>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12885>.]
