Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/india-diphtheria-takes-the-life-of-unvaccinated-kerala-teen-59420/>A 15-year-old boy from Kerala's Malappuram district in southern India has died from diphtheria, according to multiple local media reports. All accounts say that the teen was unvaccinated against diphtheria.He developed fever on 2 Jun 2016 and was admitted to the Medical College Hospital, Kozhikode on 6 Jun 2016. His condition worsened even though he was administered the anti-diphtheria serum and other drugs. The boy died at the MCH on Sat 18 Jun 2016 following multi-organ failure, according to a report in The Hindu. Two other children found to show clinical symptoms of the disease are being treated and are doing well.Malappuram district is a Muslim community known to be reluctant to immunization, reports note.Diphtheria is a dangerous respiratory disease caused by a potent toxin produced by certain strains of the bacterium _Corynebacterium diphtheria_. Diphtheria is contagious through coughing or sneezing. Risk factors include crowding, poor hygiene, and lack of immunization.Symptoms usually appear within a week of infection. This infection is characterized by a sore throat, coughing and fever very similar to many common diseases like strep throat. Additional symptoms may be bloody, watery discharge from the nose and rapid breathing. However, a presumptive diagnosis can be made by observing a characteristic thick grayish patch (membrane) found in the throat. In more severe cases, neck swelling and airway obstruction may be observed. In the tropics, cutaneous and wound diphtheria is much more common and can be a source of transmission.The real, serious danger is when the toxin that is produced by the bacterium gets into the bloodstream and spreads to organs like the heart and nervous system. Myocarditis, congestive heart failure, and neurological illnesses of paralysis that mimic Guillain-Barre syndrome are most severe. Even with treatment, fatalities are still seen in up to 10% of cases.Diphtheria can be treated and cured successfully with antitoxin and antimicrobials if started early enough. The prevention of diphtheria is through vaccination.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The following was extracted from <http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/downloads/dip.pdf>:""Diphtheria is an acute, toxin-mediated disease caused by the bacterium _Corynebacterium diphtheriae_. The name of the disease is derived from the Greek 'diphthera', meaning leather hide. The disease was described in the 5th century BCE by Hippocrates, and epidemics were described in the 6th century AD by Aetius. The bacterium was 1st observed in diphtheritic membranes by Klebs in 1883 and cultivated by Loeffler in 1884. Antitoxin was invented in the late 19th century, and toxoid was developed in the 1920s.""_C. diphtheriae_ is an aerobic Gram positive bacillus. Toxin production (toxigenicity) occurs only when the bacillus is itself infected (lysogenized) by a specific virus (bacteriophage) carrying the genetic information for the toxin (tox gene). Only toxigenic strains can cause severe disease. Culture of the organism requires selective media containing tellurite. If isolated, the organism must be distinguished in the laboratory from other _Corynebacterium_ species that normally inhabit the nasopharynx and skin (such as diphtheroids). _C. diphtheriae_ has 3 biotypes: gravis, intermedius, and mitis. The most severe disease is associated with the gravis biotype, but any strain may produce toxin. All isolates of _C. diphtheriae_ should be tested by the laboratory for toxigenicity.""Susceptible persons may acquire toxigenic diphtheria bacilli in the nasopharynx. The organism produces a toxin that inhibits cellular protein synthesis and is responsible for local tissue destruction and membrane formation. The toxin produced at the site of the membrane is absorbed into the bloodstream and then distributed to the tissues of the body. The toxin is responsible for the major complications of myocarditis and neuritis and can also cause low platelet counts (thrombocytopenia) and protein in the urine (proteinuria). Clinical disease associated with non-toxin-producing strains is generally milder. While rare severe cases have been reported, these may actually have been caused by toxigenic strains that were not detected because of inadequate culture sampling.""The incubation period of diphtheria is 2-5 days (range, 1-10 days). Disease can involve almost any mucous membrane. For clinical purposes, it is convenient to classify diphtheria into a number of manifestations, depending on the site of disease. The most common sites of diphtheria infection are the pharynx and the tonsils. Infection at these sites is usually associated with substantial systemic absorption of toxin. The onset of pharyngitis is insidious. Early symptoms include malaise, sore throat, anorexia, and low-grade fever. Within 2-3 days, a bluish-white membrane forms and extends, varying in size from covering a small patch on the tonsils to covering most of the soft palate. Often by the time a physician is contacted, the membrane is greyish-green, or black if bleeding has occurred. There is a minimal amount of mucosal erythema surrounding the membrane. The membrane is adherent to the tissue, and forcible attempts to remove it cause bleeding. Extensive membrane formation may result in respiratory obstruction.""The patient may recover at this point; or if enough toxin is absorbed, develop severe prostration, striking pallor, rapid pulse, stupor, and coma, and may even die within 6 to 10 days. Fever is usually not high, even though the patient may appear quite toxic. Patients with severe disease may develop marked edema of the submandibular areas and the anterior neck along with lymphadenopathy, giving a characteristic ""bull neck"" appearance.""Most complications of diphtheria, including death, are attributable to effects of the toxin. The severity of the disease and complications are generally related to the extent of local disease. The toxin, when absorbed, affects organs and tissues distant from the site of invasion. The most frequent complications of diphtheria are myocarditis and neuritis. Myocarditis may present as abnormal cardiac rhythms and can occur early in the course of the illness or weeks later, and can lead to heart failure. If myocarditis occurs early, it is often fatal. Neuritis most often affects motor nerves and usually resolves completely. Paralysis of the soft palate is most frequent during the 3rd week of illness. Paralysis of eye muscles, limbs, and diaphragm can occur after the 5th week. Secondary pneumonia and respiratory failure may result from diaphragmatic paralysis. Other complications include otitis media and respiratory insufficiency due to airway obstruction, especially in infants."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/308>.]
