eTN [edited]<http://www.eturbonews.com/72199/world-health-organization-global-stockpile-yellow-fever-vaccine->The global stockpile of the yellow fever vaccine may not be sufficient if simultaneous outbreaks hit the densely populated areas not covered by emergency responses, the United Nations health agency has warned, noting that by mid-June 2016, almost 18 million doses have been distributed in Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), and Uganda this year.In particular, the Angola outbreak has depleted 6 million doses twice this year [2016] already, a level never seen before. In the past, no more than 4 million doses have been used to control an outbreak in one country.According to the World Health Organization (WHO), which raised the concern today [18 Jun 2016], the world's 4 major vaccine manufacturers have been working around the clock to replenish the stockpile, bringing the global stockpile to 6.2 million doses in early June 2016.Urban yellow fever can spread rapidly in densely populated cities, causing thousands of deaths and very serious humanitarian consequences. Vaccination is the most important measure for preventing the disease. But production takes a long time -- around 12 months -- and it is difficult to forecast in advance the quantities that will be needed each year to respond to outbreaks.In 1997, WHO, in partnership with the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), M̩decins sans Fronti̬res (MSF) and the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), created the International Coordinating Group (ICG) to manage emergency vaccine stockpiles for future outbreaks and coordinate the distribution of vaccines to the affected areas.Yellow fever was 1st confirmed on 19 Jan 2016 in Angola. Nine days later, the Angolan Ministry of Health requested 1.8 million doses from the global stockpile of emergency vaccine supplies, which was approved the same day.Since then, the country has made several additional requests for vaccines from the emergency stockpile and, by 18 May 2016, had received 11.7 million doses in total. Ongoing vaccination campaigns due to the further spread of the disease are putting continuous demands on the stockpile.In addition, outbreaks in Uganda and the DRC have stretched the global supply with demands for more than 700 000 and 2.2 million doses, respectively.Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes. The ""yellow"" in the name refers to the jaundice that affects some patients. Symptoms of yellow fever include fever, headache, jaundice, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting and fatigue.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Concern about availability of yellow fever (YF) vaccine has been circulating for several weeks. Production is limited to just 4 plants and cannot be ramped up because the vaccine is produced in specific pathogen-free embryonated chicken eggs, which are in limited supply. An alternative recommendation by experts to extend coverage of existing vaccine is to reduce the dose to 1/5th the volume normally given. The WHO has indicated a willingness to consider this in case of an emergency. The challenge will be to decide when to go to the 1/5th dose early enough to be sure to not run out before the populations at risk are covered. - Mod.TY]
