AllAfrica, The Citizen report [edited]<http://allafrica.com/stories/201606200925.html>The government announced yesterday [19 Jun 2016] that 7 people died and 14 were in quarantine at Dodoma Regional Hospital following an outbreak of an unidentified disease in Chemba and Kondoa districts. [An updated report says 10 people have died and 21 others are hospitalized. - Mod.LM]The Minister for Health, Community Development, Gender, the Elderly and Children, Ms Ummy Mwalimu, said the government became aware of the outbreak last Monday [13 Jun 2016] through the office of the Dodoma Regional Medical Officer.It all started when 9 members of the same family in Mwaikisabe Village, Chemba District, became ill after reportedly eating meat from a cow that was slaughtered after breaking one of its legs.However, other people who also ate the meat were unaffected, prompting doubts on whether the animal was the source of the disease.Another 9 people from Soya, Itolwa, Kelema Balai, Gubali, Chemka, Kintima, and Ilesi villages in Chemba District and one from Ubembeni in Kondoa District developed symptoms that were similar to those experienced by the 9 relatives in Mwaikisabe Village.""Patients suffer from vomiting and diarrhoea and their eyes and skin turn yellow. They also complain of aching stomachs. So far, 21 people have been reported with these symptoms and 7 have died. To prevent the disease from spreading further, the remaining patients have been quarantined at Dodoma Regional Hospital, while others are at Kondoa District Hospital,"" Ms Mwalimu said.She, however, allayed fears that the mysterious disease could be anthrax. ""The symptoms seen in the patients are not consistent with anthrax.""Medical experts have also ruled out an outbreak of yellow fever, and were examining the possibility of the illness being Rift Valley fever.The Dodoma Regional Medical Officer, Dr James Kiologwe, said the disease could have been caused by aflatoxins, which are toxic metabolites produced by certain fungi. Aflatoxins have been associated with a number of diseases, such as aflatoxicosis in livestock and humans. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Maps of Tanzania can be seen at <http://www.mapsofworld.com/tanzania/maps/tanzania-political-map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9564>.Based on information available in this report, the causative agent for the acute illness could be a viral infection with patients having gastrointestinal symptoms and skin yellowing (jaundice?). In the differential diagnosis, acute infectious, viral hepatitis (A, B, or E) must be ruled out, Viral hepatitis is caused by a virus that attacks liver cells. The resulting inflammation impairs the liver's ability to aid in digestion of food and to remove toxins from the blood. Symptoms may range from mild to severe, but some individuals have no symptoms. However, acute infections are rarely fatal.Yellow fever is an acute viral hemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes. The yellow fever virus is endemic in tropical areas of Africa and Central and South America. The ""yellow"" in the name refers to the jaundice that affects some patients. Symptoms of yellow fever include fever, headache, jaundice, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting and fatigue. A small proportion of patients who contract the virus develop severe symptoms and approximately half of those die within 7 to 10 days. In the report above, 7 out of 21 reported cases were fatal, but more information on the exact diagnosis is not available from the report. Furthermore, Tanzania is mapped by the World Health Organization as a low risk country because no yellow fever virus has been isolated in the country. However, the abundance of yellow fever vector and other favorable ecological conditions pose potential risk for yellow fever if the virus is introduced into the country (<http://www.opengov.go.tz/files/publications/attachments/5b603b16203d6fd112d9af81b4166073.pdf>]Infectious mononucleosis caused by the Epstein Barr virus is also associated with yellowing of skin, but no gastrointestinal symptoms (<http://www.healthline.com/health/mononucleosis#Overview1>).On the other hand, the possibility of toxin ingestion most likely aflatoxins has also been indicated in the report (but see below). The report does not provide any epidemiological data on possible pathogen or toxin exposures in the cases, or any diagnostic workup done so far.Any additional information on the illness and any updates on cases will be appreciated, from the local epidemiologists, EpiCore members, or attending medical personnel. - Mod.UBAThere are not many toxins capable of causing this. Aflatoxin is NOT a fit. It takes extremely high doses and cannot be obtained through meat consumption as it is not a secondary poisoning that is, if the animal were poisoned with aflatoxin, someone eating the meat would not experience toxicity.Other possibilities from a toxin perspective include alcohol poisoning (not methanol), bacterial toxic shock, or a number of bacterial toxins (food poisoning). - Mod.TG]
