PLoS (Public Library of Science) Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0004689>Barro AS, Fegan M, Moloney B, et al: Redefining the Australian anthrax belt: modeling the ecological niche and predicting the geographic distribution of _Bacillus anthracis_PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016; 10(6): e0004689----------------------------------------------------Author summary--------------This study explores the spatial ecology of _Bacillus anthracis_, the causative agent of anthrax disease, in Australia. Globally, anthrax is a neglected zoonotic disease that primarily affect herbivores and incidentally humans and all warm-blooded animals. Here, we used historic anthrax outbreaks for the period 1996-2013 and environmental factors in an ecological niche modelling framework to quantitatively define the ecological niche of _B. anthracis_ using a genetic algorithm. This was projected onto the continental landscape of Australia to predict the geographic distribution of the pathogen. The ecological niche of _B. anthracis_ is characterized by a narrow range of ecological conditions, which are geographically concentrated in 2 disjunct corridors: a dominant corridor paralleling the Eastern Highlands runs from north Victoria to central east Queensland through the centre of New South Wales, while another corridor was predicted in the southwest of Western Australia. These findings provide an estimate of the potential geographic distribution of _B. anthracis_, and can help inform anthrax disease surveillance across Australia.Discussion----------This study aimed to improve our understanding of the landscape ecology of _B. anthracis_ and to predict the geographic distribution of the pathogen across Australia. We revised the geographic extent of the historical anthrax belt that was defined by reported outbreaks and did not explicitly consider ecological conditions. Here we modeled the geographic distribution of _B. anthracis_ based on environmental covariates known to be correlated with pathogen persistence enabling a quantitative redefinition of the anthrax belt. The distribution of _B. anthracis_ has long been associated with environmental factors including soil and climatic parameters. Incorporating these covariates into an ecological niche modeling framework provides a more accurate estimation of the geographic distribution of the pathogen, and therefore risk of anthrax, for Australia.The predicted areas of _B. anthracis_ are distinctly separated into two anthrax zones: the southeast-northeast and southwest corridors (Fig 3 [figures and tables available at the source URL above]). The southeast-northeast corridor, hereafter referred to as the 'redefined anthrax belt', parallel the Eastern Highlands, stretching from north Victoria to central eastern Queensland through New South Wales where it traverses the western region of the Hunter Valley. The redefined anthrax belt extends far beyond Durrheim et al. and captures many of the historical anthrax locations (Figs 5 and S2). In Victoria, the models also predicted the northern area of Goulburn Valley. This prediction includes South Australia along the Spencer Gulf on the southern coast of Australia in an area disjunct from the redefined anthrax belt. In a 2nd disjunct area in Western Australia, the models predict part of the Nullarbor Plain on the Great Australian Bight coast, and the Darling Range in the Perth area.The rule-set analysis indicated that the predicted ecological niche of _B. anthracis_ is defined by a narrow range of high soil pH, low organic content, calcium sulfate, and annual precipitation (Fig 4). Across the best subset, a single rule per model captured nearly all of the predicted presence (S3 Fig). This is in contrast to the models developed for the United States, where presence rules captured presence with rules delineating eastern or western conditions or presence rules in Kazakhstan dominated by northern and southern rules.Historically, livestock anthrax was widespread in Australia, in particular Victoria and New South Wales. A comparison of past (1914-1963 and 1968-1995; Table 4) and recent epizootics (1996-2013; included in the model building process) confirmed a decrease in the number and spatial extent of anthrax outbreaks in the affected states, New South Wales and Victoria. This decrease is most likely due to the implementation of improved surveillance measures, livestock vaccination, the destruction of infected carcasses by burning, site decontamination and quarantine of affected livestock and properties. A similar pattern of decrease of anthrax incidence was observed in the United States and Ukraine. In the United States, the use of an efficacious vaccine, along with better anthrax disease management strategies also resulted in a decrease in number of reported endemic counties from the 1950s onwards. In Ukraine, mass vaccination campaigns and effective control measures (burning of contaminated carcasses and sites decontamination) resulted in a reduction of anthrax foci from the early 1970s to the post-soviet period (1991 to the present day).It has been reported that during the mid-19th century, intensification of farming activities in Australia was associated with the use of unsterilized bone meal imported from India as a mineral supplement fed to livestock and as a fertilizer which led to the introduction of the pathogen. The pathogen likely spread within Australia through the movement of diseased livestock along the southeast to northeast coastal corridor, and the contamination of stock routes with _B. anthracis_ spores. Contemporary livestock movement trajectories produced by the AusVet Animal Health Services and East and Foreman agree with historical livestock movements. These movement trajectories perfectly intersect with areas of high model agreement.The predicted geographic distribution of _B. anthracis_ defines some suitable areas with no historical outbreak records, which may be due to over-prediction of the models. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to note that over-predicting the geographic distribution of a species does not necessarily infer prediction error. The potentially over-predicted geographical distribution areas may represent an accurate illustration of the spatial extent of _B. anthracis_, despite the lack of presence records that could be used for testing the accuracy of our model in those areas. For example, using GARP [genetic algorithm for rule-set prediction model system], Blackburn et al. successfully predicted suitable distributional areas for _B. anthracis_ in the northwest corner of Montana, US, that had experienced anthrax outbreaks in 2005 although specific localities were unavailable for modeling. In South Australia, it has been reported that 23 cattle died from anthrax in 1906 on a government farm at Islington, and 6 years later the disease also occurred in a metropolitan piggery at Unley after feeding pigs the carcasses of 2 horses, that had previously died from anthrax. The source of infection at Islington was not mentioned, and the reported cases at Unley were not associated with direct contact to soil spores. However, these 2 areas overlap with the high agreement areas of our GARP models.The models did not predict 2 outbreak locations that were withheld from model building, one in Western Australia and the other in Queensland. The anthrax cases in Western Australia were recorded in 1994 on 3 cattle properties in a localized area north of Walpole, where 29 cattle died from unknown sources from January to April 1994. In 1993, one cow died from anthrax on a grazing property near Rockhampton in Queensland, apparently from ingestion of contaminated feed. In each case, the affected properties were outside of the predicted areas. Since anthrax is primarily a soil-borne disease, we hypothesize that these isolated cases, as well as the early outbreaks in the south coast areas of Victoria outside the predicted geographic distribution areas (S2 Fig), are likely attributable to causes other than ingestion of spores at grazing sites.Anthrax was first recognized in Victoria in 1879 at Warrnambool followed by other areas in the south west of the state. The disease was later identified in southern and central Victoria following shipment of diseased sheep. Seddon and Albiston thought it is unlikely that the initial outbreak in the southwest of Victoria resulted from the spread of the disease from southern New South Wales, indicating that the introduction of the disease into this area came from other sources, followed by rapid spread over long distances to new areas by movement of stock by rail. The later distribution of the disease into the north of Victoria is considered to be most probably due to stock traveling over the border from NSW. The distribution of anthrax throughout Victoria has changed over time with the majority of outbreaks post-1968 falling within the predicted zone and those prior to 1968 falling outside of this zone (Table 4). We hypothesize that the presence of disease incidents along the south coast of Victoria outside of the predicted geographic distribution prior to 1968 may represent constant reintroductions of the disease into these areas, given their proximity to ports and transport routes combined with possible short term survival and local spread.This study redefines the anthrax belt of Australia, which is presently defined by the location of anthrax cases, by integrating ecological niche modeling and GIS. This approach provides insights about the ecological factors that limit the distribution of _B. anthracis_ at the continental scale for Australia. The geographic distributions presented here can help inform anthrax surveillance strategies by public and veterinary health agencies.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Jason Blackburn and his team at University of Florida, Gainesville have been niche modelling _B. anthracis_ for a good decade and got it down to a resolution of 1 sq. km. Its value is in improving the efficiency of control and surveillance as one can safely predict where outbreaks may occur and have those ranchers fully aware of the risk and vaccinating, and to call in suspect cases. Also in retrospectively sorting out possible sources, when an outbreak is not in a high risk area, inquiries can be redirected as to possible purchased contaminated feed or forage, or even animals with a possible latent infection purchased off a farm in a known anthrax area. - Mod.MHJ]
