Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/botulism-cases-rise-to-7-in-hong-kong-linked-to-botulinum-toxin-injections-73401/>Hong Kong health officials report today [22 Jun 2016] that they are investigating 2 additional suspected cases of botulism after receiving injections of botulinum toxin.The 1st patient is a 39-year-old woman with good past health who has developed dry mouth, swallowing difficulties as well as face and neck muscle weakness since 24 May 2016. She sought medical attention from a private doctor on 20 Jun 2016 and was advised to seek medical attention from the Accident and Emergency Department (AED). She attended Queen Elizabeth Hospital AED on 21 Jun 2016 and was admitted on the same day. She was found to have muscle weakness over the neck during admission. Her clinical diagnosis was suspected iatrogenic botulism, and she is currently in stable condition. According to information provided by the patient, the patient's friend brought botulinum toxin from the Mainland and performed the injection on her face on 20 May 2016 at her home.The other female patient aged 33 with good past health, has presented with generalized weakness, shortness of breath and swallowing difficulties since 15 Jun 2016. She subsequently sought medical attention twice in Dongguan, Guangdong. She returned to Hong Kong on 21 Jun 2016 and attended the Emergency Department of Kwong Wah Hospital, where she was admitted on the same day. She was found to have weakness of both shoulders and ptosis during admission. Her clinical diagnosis was suspected iatrogenic botulism, and she is currently in stable condition.According to information provided by the patient, she had received injections to both upper arms for slimming purposes in a beauty shop in Shenzhen, Guangdong on 15 May 2016, but she was uncertain whether the injections received were botulinum toxin.""We have no evidence at this stage that patients of the 7 recent cases so far had received injections in the same premises. Epidemiological investigations are ongoing,"" the spokesman added.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The number of cases of botulism related to the illicit use of botulinum toxin has increased to 7. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/198>.]
