KXL FM News 101 [edited]<http://www.kxl.com/two-portland-teachers-test-positive-lead/>Two Portland [Oregon] teachers have tested positive for lead. OPB [Oregon Public Broadcasting] says one is a teacher at Peninsula School in North Portland and the other recently transferred from there to another school. Portland Association of Teachers President Gwen Sullivan says it has not been verified that Peninsula is the source and says they urge all teachers whose tests show levels of lead to have their homes tested as well.She says ""I feel like we're putting together this puzzle, 3-D puzzle, as it unfolds."" She says the union is encouraging all teachers who want to get tested to do so and has asked the district to provide testing. She says the district says its considering at home tests or making testing available at a school site. But she says the union is waiting to hear back. Sullivan says ""we are trying to make sure there's a sense of urgency around this.""The spotlight has been on lead since last month [May 2016] after tests at 2 schools, Creston and Rose City Park, showed high levels of lead. The district shut down drinking fountains district wide, brought in bottled water and announced all schools would be tested over the summer.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Initially, lead poisoning can be hard to detect -- even people who seem healthy can have high blood levels of lead. Signs and symptoms usually don't appear until dangerous amounts have accumulated. Although children are primarily at risk, lead poisoning is also dangerous for adults. Signs and symptoms in adults may include:- high blood pressure;- abdominal pain;- constipation;- joint pains;- muscle pain;- declines in mental functioning;- pain, numbness or tingling of the extremities;- headache;- memory loss;- mood disorders;- reduced sperm count, abnormal sperm;- miscarriage or premature birth in pregnant womenExposure to even low levels of lead can cause damage over time, especially in children. The greatest risk is to brain development, where irreversible damage may occur. Higher levels can damage the kidneys and nervous system in both children and adults. Very high lead levels may cause seizures, unconsciousness, and possibly death. Doctors usually use a simple blood test to detect lead poisoning. A small blood sample is taken from a vein. Lead levels in the blood are measured in micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL). A level of 5 mcg/dL or higher indicates a probable unsafe level of lead in the blood and should be tested periodically. If levels become too high -- generally 45 mcg/dL or higher -- treatment is required. Treatment may be initiated at lower levels.Chelation therapy. In this treatment, you take a medication that binds with the lead so that it's excreted in your urine.EDTA therapy. Doctors treat adults with lead levels greater than 45 mcg/dL of blood with one or more of 3 drugs, most commonly a chemical called ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). Depending on your lead level, you may need more than one treatment. In such severe cases, however, it may not be possible to reverse damage that has already occurred. Your doctor may choose other, newer forms of chelation therapy.In the case of the teachers, the school may be the source of lead but their homes should also be tested. The source of lead in the water, whether pipes in the school or home, needs to be identified and corrected to prevent further exposure and future exposures.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/basics/symptoms/con-20035487>. - Mod.TG]
