WHO, Regional Office for Africa, Press Release [edited]<http://www.afro.who.int/en/media-centre/pressreleases/item/8753-launch-of-emergency-vaccination-campaigns-on-the-dr-congo-and-angola-border.html>As the yellow fever outbreak in Angola and Democratic Republic of the Congo continues, the World Health Organization will launch emergency pre-emptive vaccination campaigns on the DR Congo, Angola border, and the city of Kinshasa in the DR Congo to halt the epidemic and prevent the risk of further international spread.The initial phase of the campaign which begins in July [2016] will focus on districts where there is high movement of people and intense trade activities, particularly the northern border districts of Angola and targeted border districts in neighbouring countries. Specifically, within a 75-100 km [47-62 mi] belt spanning the border between Angola and DR Congo and targeted health zones/communes at risk in Kinshasa city in the DR Congo. This will create an immune buffer to prevent further international spread.Important gains in preventive vaccination campaigns have been achieved. So far more than 15 million doses of vaccine have been delivered to Angola and DR Congo. However, the urgent need to accelerate vaccination campaigns and the lack of sufficient funds for field operational activities, remain a challenge in Angola and DR Congo.""While WHO is working with partners and vaccine manufacturers to increase vaccine production and replenish the emergency stockpile currently being used for this outbreak, it is vital to interrupt transmission, especially in cross-border areas, to rapidly bring this outbreak under control and halt further international spread,"" said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, the World Health Organization Regional Director for Africa.Angola and DR Congo are being supported by WHO and partners to strengthen yellow fever screening for evidence at all major points of entry, including Luanda, Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, and Matadi. Yellow fever vaccination is being offered at these points of entry for eligible travelers.""WHO will continue to work with partners to scale up the required human resources, financial and other logistics so that response teams are present in every province of Angola where cases have been reported or where there is high risk. WHO will also continue its resource mobilization efforts as more resources are needed to address the operational challenges in Angola. In addition, to this a multidisciplinary team of experts will next week begin an evaluation of the response efforts in Angola and DR Congo and address any gaps,"" the Regional Director added.As of 13 Jun 2016, 3 countries -- China, Kenya, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo -- had reported cases linked to the Angola outbreak. An alert issued by the Republic of Congo is under investigation by a joint Ministry of Health, WHO, and UNICEF team. 2 suspected cases of yellow fever earlier reported in Sao Tome and Principe were investigated and have been ruled out. Another outbreak of yellow fever reported in Uganda and not linked to the Angola outbreak has been controlled.As of 19 Jun 2016, 1106 suspected cases, including 75 deaths, had been reported [in the DR Congo] in 5 provinces (Bas-U̩l̩, Kwango, Tshuapa, Kongo Central, and Kinshasa). At least 7 cases are confirmed as locally transmitted. WHO has dispatched multidisciplinary teams to Kongo Central, Kwango, and Kinshasa provinces and is supporting the country with active case investigations, reactive vaccination and social mobilization activities.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Coordinating vaccination efforts on both sides of the border, focusing on areas of greatest risk will help to simplify a difficult logistical challenge that this large border area presents. This report does not indicate the number of individuals in the targeted areas to be vaccinated nor the amount of vaccine currently available. There have been recent reports indicating looming vaccine shortages. Experts have recommended reducing the volume of the dose to 1/5 of the usual amount administered in order to provide coverage to 5 times more individuals. WHO has agreed that dose volume reduction can be done in emergencies. Ramping up vaccine production can not be done quickly. The vaccine is produced in specific pathogen-free eggs, with limited availability. - Mod.TY]
