WHO Situation Report, Yellow Fever [edited]<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/246113/1/yellowfeversitrep-23Jun2016-eng.pdf>Summary- In Angola the total number of notified cases has increased since early 2016. As of 17 Jun 2016 a total of 3294 suspected cases have been reported, of which 861 are confirmed. The total number of reported deaths is 347, of which 115 were reported among confirmed cases. Suspected cases have been reported in all provinces, and confirmed cases have been reported in 16 of 18 provinces and 79 of 123 reporting districts.- Mass vaccination campaigns 1st began in Luanda and have now expanded to cover most of the other affected parts of Angola. Recently the campaigns have focused on border areas. Despite extensive vaccination efforts circulation of the virus persists.- As of 20 Jun [2016], in the Democratic Republic of The Congo (DRC), the total number of notified suspected cases is 1106, with 68 confirmed cases and 75 deaths. Cases have been reported in 22 health zones in 5 provinces. Of the 68 confirmed cases, 59 were imported from Angola, 2 are sylvatic and 7 are autochthonous.- Surveillance efforts have increased and vaccination campaigns in DRC have centred on affected zones in Kinshasa and Kongo Central.- 2 additional countries have reported confirmed yellow fever cases imported from Angola: Kenya (2 cases) and People's Republic of China (11 cases). These cases highlight the risk of international spread through non-immunised travellers.- 6 countries (Brazil, Chad, Colombia, Ghana, Peru and Uganda) are currently reporting yellow fever outbreaks or sporadic cases not linked to the Angolan outbreak.- Following the advice of the Emergency Committee (EC) convened on 19 May 2016, the WHO Director-General decided that urban yellow fever outbreaks in Angola and DRC are serious public health events which warrant intensified national action and enhanced international support. The events do not at this time constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).Response- The WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization reviewed existing evidence that demonstrates that using a 5th of a standard vaccine dose would still provide protection against the disease for at least 12 months and possibly much longer. This approach, known as fractional dosing, is under consideration as a short-term measure, in the context of a potential vaccine shortage for use in emergencies.- In Angola, vaccination campaigns started 1st in Luanda province at the beginning of February, in mid-April in Benguela and Huambo, and on 16 May [2016] in Cuanza Sul, Huila and Uige provinces. Vaccination campaigns have also started in Cuango district and are planned in Chitato district (Lunda Norte).- As of 11 Jun [2016], ICG approved 2.3 million doses of yellow fever vaccine for vaccination in 12 districts in 9 provinces (Bie, Cunene, Benguela, Huila, Kuanza Norte, Uige, Namibe, Cuanza Sul, Cuando and Cubango).- 243 690 vaccine doses will be sent to the border district of Soyo, in Zaire Province, for mass vaccination. The mass campaign is planned to start this week. An additional 1 036 500 doses of yellow fever vaccine were received and have been designated for Coango, Chitato and Soyo districts. Mass vaccination campaigns are underway in the border districts of Chitato and Coango in Lunda Norte province.- In DRC, a vaccination campaign in 11 health zones finished on 4 Jun [2016] and reached around 2.1 million people. A new request for vaccines has been sent to ICG for a vaccination campaign in newly affected health zones in Kinshasa and Kwango provinces.- In Uganda a reactive mass vaccination campaign in Kalangala has been completed with 93.5 percent vaccination coverage of the population. Vaccination coverage is 88 pecent for Masaka and 97 percent for Rukungiri districts.- The number of vaccines currently available for the emergency response is 5.2 million through the ICG. The amount of doses already allocated to respond to the outbreak is not included in this number.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The outbreak continues in Angola with declining incidence nationally, but expanding occurrence geographically. The DRC continues to be worrisome. Although the numbers of reported locally acquired cases is small, it is an indication that vector mosquitoes and susceptible individuals are present, including in Kinshasa, a city of over 11 million inhabitants. There appears to be an adequate supply of vaccine currently, but an outbreak in Kinshasa would consume the 5.2 million reserve doses that the ICG has. Deciding when to begin fractional dosing will not be easy. Deciding too late, should there be a resurgence in cases anywhere, could exhaust the reserve before adequate coverage was attained. The entire report is not given here. Those interested in seeing more detailed country-by-country summaries, many with tables and graphs, are encouraged to access the full report at the above source URL. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/165>.]
