The Lancet [excerpted, edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)30890-X/fulltext?elsca1=etoc>A team from WHO's Regional Office for Africa is investigating a mysterious viral haemorrhagic fever outbreak in northern South Sudan that has killed 10 people. At the same time, national health officials are scrambling to put preventive measures in place based on the scant knowledge they have so far. However, in a country where nearly 2.5 years of fighting have left the health system in tatters, it is unclear how effective those efforts will be.The outbreak was 1st reported to national health officials in March [2016], but John Rumunu, South Sudan's director general of preventive health services for the Ministry of Health, said it might have started as early as December 2015. The symptoms include unexplained bleeding, vomiting, and fever. 52 suspected cases (most infections have been in people younger than 20 years) have occurred so far in 2 counties near South Sudan's border with Sudan, although there has been only one new patient since early May 2016. The country is still taking precautions, Rumunu said, given that officials remain in the dark over how the syndrome is transmitted or what it even is.Laboratory tests of samples have so far been negative for the more common haemorrhagic fevers, including Ebola virus disease, Marburg virus disease, and Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever. There is no evidence of person-to-person transmission. That had led researchers to suspect a mixed arbovirus outbreak, according to WHO.Trevor Shoemaker is an epidemiologist with the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) Viral Special Pathogens Branch and until recently was stationed at the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI), one of 3 laboratories where samples were sent for testing. He said it was unsurprising that an initial round of tests was inconclusive. ""It doesn't mean there wasn't an infectious cause,"" he said. ""It just means it was really hard to identify what was causing it.""This situation is not an uncommon scenario. The cause of an outbreak in the Darfur region of Sudan that killed 120 people between August and September 2015 is still unknown. Darfur borders the area of South Sudan currently reporting cases, although it is unclear whether the 2 incidents are related.Because some of the samples UVRI received from the current outbreak did test positive for malaria and chikungunya virus, both mosquito-borne illnesses, Shoemaker said it made sense to suspect an arbovirus. ""When you get these large emergences of mosquitoes and mosquito-borne illnesses, a lot of people getting sick at the same time, then you have that suspicion,"" he said.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The etiology of the cases and fatalities that occurred remain undetermined. An earlier report (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20160519.4233420) indicated that samples of 33 patients were shipped to WHO collaborating centres in Uganda (Uganda Virus Research Institute), Senegal (Institut Pasteur of Dakar), and South Africa (National Institute for Communicable Diseases). The samples were tested by plaque reduction neutralization test, polymerase chain reaction, or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. All samples were negative for Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, Ebola virus disease, Marburg virus disease, Rift Valley fever, yellow fever, West Nile virus and Zika virus; 5 samples tested positive for o'nyong-nyong virus; 3 samples were positive for chikungunya; and one sample tested positive for dengue virus. Neither onyong-onyong or chikungunya virus infections produce the clinical picture described above.That post went on to say that despite several viral pathogens being ruled out by laboratory tests, the etiology of this hemorrhagic disease remains unknown. Interestingly, there was a similar outbreak of suspected hemorrhagic disease in southern Sudan in 1999, with an estimated 3600 deaths. Professor Robert Swanepoel of the University of Pretoria, South Africa was head of the Special Pathogens Unit at the time and screened the samples for all of the usual causes of suspected haemorrhagic fever in Africa without positive result, and, as a last resort, he examined the serum samples by dark field microscopy for the possible presence of leptospires and was astonished to find borrelias. He subsequently confirmed the identity of the bacterium as _Borrelia recurrentis_, the etiological agent of louse-borne relapsing fever, by PCR. (See ProMED-mail archive no. 20151208.3849227). It would be of interest to know whether this pathogen or others, such as those of leptospirosis, have been tested for.Darfur in Sudan, relatively close to the affected area in South Sudan, had at least 469 cases of undiagnosed viral haemorrhagic fever, including 120 deaths, between August and November 2015. The etiology of the pathogen involved in that outbreak was not determined. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/8402>.]
