Daily Newshttp://dailynews.co.tz/index.php/home-news/51037-strange-disease-linked-to-aflatoxin-poisoningAs the number of patients who contracted the mysterious disease that ravaged parts of Chemba and Kondoa districts in Dodoma Region has reached 32, preliminary laboratory results of the tests undertaken by the Tanzania Food and Drugs Authority (TFDA) have shown traces of aflatoxin poisoning in the grain samples.The Minister for Health, Social Development, Gender, Elderly and Children, Ms Ummy Mwalimu, said 13 out of 17 samples were tested with high level of aflatoxin poisoning than the national standards and all were maize samples.""Among the samples contaminated with aflatoxin 12 of them were from Chemba District and one from Kondoa District,"" Ms Mwalimu told a news conference in Dar es Salaam yesterday [25 Jun 2016].The samples of cereals tested by the TFDA included maize, sorghum, and millet. The mysterious disease was detected for the 1st time on 13 Jun 2016 in Chemba District where it has reportedly affected a family of 9 people in Mwaikisabe Village before it spread out to surrounding areas, including Kondoa District.""To be sure of this, my ministry will, pending the results of blood tests and stool, which we will send to the United States Centre for Disease Control (CDC) on [Mon 27 Jun 2016], is also finalising a few things with them before sending the samples,"" the minister explained.Ms Mwalimu said the in-patients are responding well to treatment save for 5 who are in critical condition. The laboratory results from the CDC might take one week, according to her.Aflatoxins are a class of toxic compounds that are produced by certain moulds found in food, which can cause liver damage and cancer. Poor preservation of food crops is the major cause of aflatoxins.Major symptoms of the strange disease include vomiting, diarrhoea, and yellowing of eyes and other parts of the body. Other symptoms include stomachache leading to swelling of the abdomen after being filled with water.""The patients neither experience high temperatures nor skin rashes and it affects all people, including adults and children,"" she explained.Ms Mwalimu, however, dismissed circulated reports that people who contracted the disease had earlier eaten cow meat that had been slaughtered with one of its limbs fractured, saying the disease was not caused by the meat because even those who didn't consume it contracted the disease.She said the government will keep on working around the clock to contain the disease by engaging various stakeholders including the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the CDC.A total of 7 people were reported dead last week, while 21 others were quarantined at the Dodoma Regional Referral Hospital and Kondoa District Hospital after they contracted the mysterious disease.Ms Mwalimu told journalists that initial tests at the national laboratory have as well proved that the strange disease is not yellow fever as laboratory technicians were still working to identify other diseases such as Rift Valley fever (RVF).[Byline: Hilda Mhagama]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Joseph Dudley[While many suspected the illness was aflatoxin, a toxic fungus on grains, the story of the family eating the meat then coming down with an illness was not compatible with aflatoxin intoxication. Furthermore, poisoning with aflatoxin is something that takes a bit of time to build up in the system, in the vast majority of cases.Aflatoxins are a group of fungal metabolic products formed by at least 2 species of fungus, _Aspergillus flavus_ and _A. parasiticus_, in several agricultural commodities, including corn or maize. 2 structural types of aflatoxins are known (B and G types), of which aflatoxin B1 is considered the most toxic. Exposure to aflatoxins occurs primarily through ingestion of contaminated foods and can cause hepatic and gastrointestinal injury and have immunosuppressive, teratogenic, and oncogenic effects. Chronic low-level aflatoxin exposure can increase the risk for hepatocellular carcinoma. Severe, acute liver injury with high morbidity and mortality has been associated with high-dose exposures to aflatoxins. Ingestion of 2-6 mg/day of aflatoxin for a month can cause acute hepatitis and death.Aflatoxin grows on improperly stored grains and other commodities, such as cassava, chili peppers, corn, cotton seed, millet, peanuts, rice, sorghum, sunflower seeds, tree nuts, wheat, and a variety of spices. In certain environmental conditions aflatoxin may grow on the grains/nuts prior to harvest. Consumption of the contaminated grains can produce clinical signs in animals and people. The most prominent sign is liver failure. Vomiting, and diarrhea may be seen in cases involving aflatoxin. - Mod.TGMaps of Tanzania can be seen at <http://www.mapsofworld.com/tanzania/maps/tanzania-political-map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9564>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
