WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update -- 266 (based on data up to 12 Jun 2016)---------------------------------------------------------Summary-------- In temperate countries in the southern hemisphere, influenza activity increased steadily in the last weeks in South America and South Africa, but remained still low overall in most of Oceania. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere was back to inter-seasonal levels.- In temperate South America, influenza season has started with steadily increasing reports of influenza-like illness (ILI), acute respiratory infection (ARI), and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) cases over the last few weeks. Of the respiratory viruses detected, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 were predominant.- In the temperate countries of Southern Africa, influenza detections continued to increase with predominantly influenza B viruses detected.- In Oceania, influenza virus activity remained low. Slight increases in ILI were detected in Australia.- In the Caribbean countries, respiratory virus activity remained generally low with decreasing influenza B activity reported in Cuba over the past few weeks.- In Central America, active circulation of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 continued in El Salvador and increased in Panama. RSV activity continued in Costa Rica and Guatemala.- In tropical South America, active circulation of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and RSV continued in most countries in the region. Influenza detections increased in Bolivia and Colombia. ARI and SARI activities were elevated in Ecuador and Colombia. However, in Brazil, influenza detections and SARI indicators seemed to have peaked already (see the full report for more information).- In tropical countries of South Asia, influenza activity was generally low with influenza A and B co-circulating in the region.- In the northern temperate and central tropical regions of Africa, influenza activity was generally low with influenza A virus detections predominant in Western Africa and influenza B virus detections predominant in Eastern Africa and Northern Africa.- In North America and Europe, influenza activity was low with influenza B predominant. ILI levels were below seasonal thresholds.- Influenza activity continued to decrease in temperate Asia with a predominance of influenza B virus activity.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 82 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 30 May 2016 to 12 Jun 2016 (data as of 24 Jun 2016 07:06:01 UTC).The WHO GISRS [Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System] laboratories tested more than 55586 specimens during that time period. 3800 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 2282 (60.1 percent) were typed as influenza A and 1518 (39.9 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 1426 (86.2 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 228 (13.8 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 175 (32.1 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 371 (67.9 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.[The detailed influenza update can be accessed at the source URL above.]Source of data--------------The Global Influenza Programme monitors influenza activity worldwide and publishes an update every 2 weeks. The updates are based on available epidemiological and virological data sources, including FluNet (reported by the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System) and influenza reports from WHO Regional Offices and Member States. Completeness can vary among updates due to availability and quality of data available at the time when the update is developed.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Since the last update (Influenza (25): WHO global update, seasonal 20160616.4290476), the proportion of influenza B viruses detected decreased or remained low (B-Victoria lineage predominant), except in the temperate countries of Southern Africa, where detections of predominantly influenza B viruses continued to increase. Among the influenza A viruses, active circulation of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus continues in Central America and tropical South America. No novel influenza sub-types were reported during this period. - Mod.UBA]
