McCook Gazette [edited]<http://www.mccookgazette.com/story/2312606.html>Health officials confirmed a 3rd Southwest Nebraska case of Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) earlier this week, just as one McCook community leader returned from his own harrowing experience with the disease. McCook City Attorney NM spent the majority of what was supposed to be a scenic road-trip to Washington State last week bouncing from one healthcare facility to another before ending up under the care of an infectious disease doctor. He was eventually diagnosed with RMSF and believes he contracted the disease from a tick bite he received while hunting morel mushrooms in Hitchcock County.He encountered several ticks during the excursion but said he found 1 on him several days after the trip, approximately the 2nd week in May 2016. He and his wife began their road-trip vacation on 22 May 2016 and 2 days into it, he became ill following a hike in Oregon. He initially broke out with hives all over his torso and by the end of the day they were on his face, feet and palms. The couple continued their journey and stopped at a walk-in clinic in Anacortes, Washington, on 26 May 2016 after he began experiencing abdominal pain.NM said health officials at the clinic didn't recognize the symptoms and thought he might have come in contact with something during his hike in Oregon. He attempted to continue his trip but by the next day the abdominal pain was so intense he ended up in the emergency room in Anacortes. NM's wife, a surgical nurse at a Community Hospital, was the 1st to suspect her husband's condition might be related to the Hitchcock County tick bite and mentioned it to an ER doctor at the time.""He still didn't put two and two together,"" said the patient earlier this week while recalling the ordeal to the Gazette. He indicated he certainly would have preferred the disease was diagnosed sooner and avoided the unbearable abdominal pain that followed. ER officials however, were uncertain what was causing his symptoms and again released him after prescribing medication for the abdominal pain and rash.The couple continued their journey to San Juan Island where they had intended to check into a seaside cabin and do some whale watching. Instead, the man's abdominal pain increased and the couple found themselves in an emergency room on San Juan Island. Thankfully, the 3rd time was a charm for the man and his wife. ""By that time my heart was being affected, it was racing, and my white blood cell count was extremely high in addition to unbearable abdominal pain,"" said MN, adding he later found out the next phase of his symptoms would have very likely been systematic organ failure.He was transported to the hospital in Anacortes by ferry, after refusing an air-ambulance due to the cost. The response to antimicrobial therapy was very rapid, according to the patient. He was 3 days into severe symptoms but said he began feeling significantly better once he was treated with the proper medication.The patient was later informed the last recorded case of RMSF in that part of the USA was 3 decades ago.[Byline: Bruce Baker]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is vital to diagnose rickettsial infection promptly to minimize morbidity and mortality. In states such as Nebraska, where the disease is less endemic than the Middle Atlantic States of North Carolina and Tennessee and the central states of Missouri and Oklahoma, it is particularly important to think of this infection. Nebraska, however, shares its southern border with Missouri.When the female tick harboring the organism attaches to a passing human, she usually starts low on the body after transferring from grassy vegetation or even directly or indirectly from a dog. After crawling around on clothes seeking an appropriate cutaneous site (wearing white clothes makes a wandering tick easier to spot), she attaches and begins to feed.If not already partially fed, after attaching, it generally takes 24 hours to activate and transmit the rickettsial organism. For this reason, daily or twice-daily tick checks with removal will minimize disease transmission. Ticks that attach in hairy areas such as the scalp or beard may be more difficult to find.The incubation period of the disease is about a week after the tick exposure, long after the tick has detached. The presenting illness is generally nonspecific, fever, muscle pains, headache (but the headache is usually described as quite severe). The rash begins on day 3 of the illness, initially maculopapular at the wrists and ankles before becoming petechial and purpuric, involving the palms and soles as well as spreading proximally to the trunk. Purpurae usually are not seen before the 6th day of illness. The mortality is indeed quite low if treatment (usually a tetracycline) is begun during the 1st 2 days of the rash or before. It should be noted that hives which was the presenting symptom in this patient are not usually described in RMSF but severe abdominal pain can be.Empiric treatment for this infection should always be begun in people with compatible symptoms inhabiting endemic areas during the spring and summer, even if no tick bite is known.The early rash of this disease can be seen at <http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d2/Rocky_Mountain_spotted_fever_PHIL_1962_lores.jpg>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/229>.]
