Broomfield Colorado News Center [edited]<http://www.broomfield.org/index.aspx?NID=671>A Broomfield resident has tested positive for tularemia. Tularemia is a disease of animals and humans caused by the bacterium _Francisella tularensis_. Although tularemia is a potentially serious disease, it is treatable with common antimicrobials. The Broomfield resident has been treated after being evaluated by a health care provider and is recovering. Tularemia is not known to be spread from person to person. People become infected with tularemia by: breathing in the bacteria; contact with contaminated soil; handling infected animal carcasses; being bitten by an infected tick, deerfly or other insect; or by eating or drinking contaminated food or water.""In recent years, there has been a significant increase in cases believed to be the result of exposure to bacteria contaminated soil,"" said Jason Vahling, Broomfield County public health director. ""People should take precautions when gardening or landscaping because when a person mows, blows leaves, or turns up the soil, the bacteria can be aerosolized and inhaled,"" said Vahling.According to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, this is the 3rd reported human case of tularemia in Colorado in 2016, and a 4th is under investigation. In 2015, 52 cases of human tularemia were reported in Colorado, more than 10 times the typical number of 0-4 cases reported annually from 1954-2013.Depending on the exposure, symptoms may include: abrupt onset of fever, skin ulcers, swollen and painful lymph glands, inflamed eyes, sore throat, mouth sores, diarrhea, or pneumonia. Patients can also have chills, headache, muscle aches, cough, or difficulty breathing. Symptoms usually appear 3 to 5 days after exposure to the bacteria, but can take as long as 14 days.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The clinical manifestations of human tularemia in this case are not stated and depend on the route of entry of the organism into the body. Airborne _F. tularensis_ would mainly cause pleuropneumonitis. Exposures that penetrate broken skin result in ulceroglandular or glandular disease. The onset of tularemia is usually abrupt, with fever, headache, chills and rigors, generalized body aches (often prominent in the low back), coryza (inflammation of the mucous membranes lining the nasal cavity), and sore throat. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur. Sweats, fever, chills, progressive weakness, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss characterize the continuing illness. Some illnesses manifest as an undifferentiated febrile illness which is called the typhoidal form. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/209>.]
