The Lancet [edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(16)30902-3.pdf>Ref: FranÌ¤a GVA, Schuler-Faccini L, Oliveira WK, et al: Congenital Zika virus syndrome in Brazil: a case series of the first 1501 live births with complete investigation. Lancet, published online 29 Jun 2016----------------------------------------------------------------------Summary-------BackgroundIn November, 2015, an epidemic of microcephaly was reported in Brazil, which was later attributed to congenital Zika virus infection. 7830 suspected cases had been reported to the Brazilian Ministry of Health by 4 Jun 2016, but little is known about their characteristics. We aimed to describe these newborn babies in terms of clinical findings, anthropometry, and survival.MethodsWe reviewed all 1501 live born infants for whom investigation by medical teams at State level had been completed as of 27 Feb 2016, and classified suspected cases into 5 categories based on neuroimaging and laboratory results for Zika virus and other relevant infections. Definite cases had laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection; highly probable cases presented specific neuroimaging findings, and negative laboratory results for other congenital infections; moderately probable cases had specific imaging findings but other infections could not be ruled out; somewhat probable cases had imaging findings, but these were not reported in detail by the local teams; all other newborn babies were classified as discarded cases. Head circumference by gestational age was assessed with InterGrowth standards. 1st week mortality and history of rash were provided by the State medical teams.FindingsBetween 19 Nov 2015, and 27 Feb 2015, investigations were completed for 1501 suspected cases reported to the Brazilian Ministry of Health, of whom 899 were discarded. Of the remainder 602 cases, 76 were definite, 54 highly probable, 181 moderately probable, and 291 somewhat probable of congenital Zika virus syndrome. Clinical, anthropometric, and survival differences were small among the 4 groups. Compared with these 4 groups, the 899 discarded cases had larger head circumferences (mean Z scores -1.54 vs -3.13, difference 1.58 [95 percent CI [confidence interval] 1.45-1.72]); lower 1st-week mortality (14 per 1000 vs 51 per 1000; rate ratio 0.28 [95 percent CI 0.14-0.56]); and were less likely to have a history of rash during pregnancy (20åá7 percent vs 61.4 percent, ratio 0.34 [95 percent CI 0.27-0.42]). Rashes in the 3rd trimester of pregnancy were associated with brain abnormalities despite normal sized heads. One in 5 definite or probable cases presented head circumferences in the normal range (above -2 SD below the median of the InterGrowth standard) and for 1/3 of definite and probable cases there was no history of a rash during pregnancy. The peak of the epidemic occurred in late November, 2015.InterpretationZika virus congenital syndrome is a new teratogenic disease. Because many definite or probable cases present normal head circumference values and their mothers do not report having a rash, screening criteria must be revised in order to detect all affected newborn babies.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Babies with normal head sizes born to Zika virus infected mothers in the 3rd trimester of gestation may still have brain damage, underscoring the author's point that screening criteria must be revised in order to detect all affected neonates. This is a worrisome finding, since we do not yet know what the developmental consequences of these affected babies will be. Interestingly, an additional report was published in The Lancet of 29 Jun 2016 involving study of a case series of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples from 5 cases, including 2 newborn babies with microcephaly and severe arthrogryposis who died shortly after birth, one 2-month-old baby, and 2 placentas from spontaneous abortions, from Brazil. Viral antigens were localised to glial cells and neurons and associated with microcalcifications in all 3 fatal cases with microcephaly. Antigens were also seen in chorionic villi of one of the 1st trimester placentas. Tissues from all 5 cases were positive for Zika virus RNA by RT-PCR, and sequence analyses showed highest identities with Zika virus strains isolated from Brazil during 2015. These findings provide strong evidence of a link between Zika virus infection and different congenital central nervous system malformations, including microcephaly as well as arthrogryposis and spontaneous abortions (<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)30883-2/abstract>). - Mod.TY]******[3] Antibody-dependent enhancementDate: Thu 23 Jun 2016Source: Nature Immunology [edited]<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27339099>Ref: Dejnirattisai W, Supasa P, Wongwiwat W, et al: Dengue virus sero-cross-reactivity drives antibody-dependent enhancement of infection with Zika virus. Nat Immunol. 2016. [Epub ahead of print]----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------Zika virus (ZIKV) was discovered in 1947 and was thought to lead to relatively mild disease. The recent explosive outbreak of ZIKV in South America has led to widespread concern, with reports of neurological sequelae ranging from Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome to microcephaly. ZIKV infection has occurred in areas previously exposed to dengue virus (DENV), a flavivirus closely related to ZIKV. Here we investigated the serological cross-reaction between the 2 viruses. Plasma immune to DENV showed substantial cross-reaction to ZIKV and was able to drive antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of ZIKV infection. Using a panel of human monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to DENV, we showed that most antibodies that reacted to DENV envelope protein also reacted to ZIKV. Antibodies to linear epitopes, including the immunodominant fusion-loop epitope, were able to bind ZIKV but were unable to neutralize the virus and instead promoted ADE. Our data indicate that immunity to DENV might drive greater ZIKV replication and have clear implications for disease pathogenesis and future vaccine programs for ZIKV and DENV.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This is not good news, considering the millions of dengue-immune individuals in the tropics and subtropics of the world. This also raises some complicated questions about the possibility of vaccine-primed ADE when dengue or Zika virus vaccines area approved and applied broadly. - Mod.TY]******[4] Virus in urine and salivaDate: Fri 24 Jun 2016Source: PLoS (Public Library of Science) Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0004816>Bonaldo MC, Ribeiro IP, Lima NS, et al: Isolation of infective Zika virus from urine and saliva of patients in Brazil. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016. eCollection 2016.----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------BackgroundZika virus (ZIKV) is an emergent threat provoking a worldwide explosive outbreak. Since January 2015, 41 countries reported autochthonous cases. In Brazil, an increase in Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome and microcephaly cases was linked to ZIKV infections. A recent report describing low experimental transmission efficiency of its main putative vector, _Ae. aegypti_, in conjunction with apparent sexual transmission notifications, prompted the investigation of other potential sources of viral dissemination. Urine and saliva have been previously established as useful tools in ZIKV diagnosis. Here, we described the presence and isolation of infectious ZIKV particles from saliva and urine of acute phase patients in the Rio de Janeiro state, Brazil.Methodology/principal findings9 urine and 5 saliva samples from 9 patients from Rio de Janeiro presenting rash and other typical Zika acute phase symptoms were inoculated in Vero cell culture and submitted to specific ZIKV RNA detection and quantification through, respectively, NAT-Zika, RT-PCR and RT-qPCR. 2 ZIKV isolates were achieved, one from urine and one from saliva specimens. ZIKV nucleic acid was identified by all methods in 4 patients. Whenever both urine and saliva samples were available from the same patient, urine viral loads were higher, corroborating the general sense that it is a better source for ZIKV molecular diagnostic. In spite of this, from the 2 isolated strains, each from one patient, only one derived from urine, suggesting that other factors, like the acidic nature of this fluid, might interfere with virion infectivity. The complete genome of both ZIKV isolates was obtained. Phylogenetic analysis revealed similarity with strains previously isolated during the South America outbreak.Conclusions/significanceThe detection of infectious ZIKV particles in urine and saliva of patients during the acute phase may represent a critical factor in the spread of virus. The epidemiological relevance of this finding, regarding the contribution of alternative non-vectorial ZIKV transmission routes, needs further investigation.Author summaryThe American continent has recently been the scene of a devastating epidemic of Zika virus and its severe manifestations, such as microcephaly in newborns and Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome. Zika virus, first detected in 1947 in Africa, only from 2007 started provoking outbreaks. Zika, dengue and chikungunya viruses are primarily transmitted by _Aedes_ mosquitoes. Dengue has been endemic in Brazil for almost 30 years, and the country is largely infested by its main vector, _Ae. aegypti_. Chikungunya virus entered the country in late 2014 and Zika presence was confirmed 8 months later. Nevertheless, Zika notifications multiplied and spread across the country with unprecedented speed, raising the possibility of other transmission routes. This hypothesis was strengthened by some recent reports of Zika sexual transmission in _Ae. aegypti_-free areas and by the description of a low transmission efficiency to Zika virus in local _Ae. aegypti_. We found Zika active particles in both urine and saliva of acute phase patients, and a finding that was promptly announced by Fiocruz via Press Conference on 5 Feb, 2016. In this work, we bring up the potential alternative person-to-person infection routes beyond the vectorial transmission that might have epidemiological relevance.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>andRoland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[As the authors state, the epidemiological significance of the virus in saliva and urine as person-to-person transmission mechanisms awaits further study. - Mod.TY]******[5] Rhesus macaque modelDate: Tue 28 Jun 2016Source: Nature Communications [edited]<http://www.nature.com/ncomms/2016/160628/ncomms12204/full/ncomms12204.html>Dudley DM, Aliota MT, Mohr EL, et al: A rhesus macaque model of Asian-lineage Zika virus infection. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:12204.----------------------------------------------------------------------Infection with Asian-lineage Zika virus (ZIKV) has been associated with Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome and fetal abnormalities, but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Animal models of infection are thus urgently needed. Here we show that rhesus macaques are susceptible to infection by an Asian-lineage ZIKV closely related to strains currently circulating in the Americas. Following subcutaneous inoculation, ZIKV RNA is detected in plasma 1 day post infection (d.p.i.) in all animals (N=8, including 2 pregnant animals), and is also present in saliva, urine and cerebrospinal fluid. Non-pregnant and pregnant animals remain viremic for 21 days and for up to at least 57 days, respectively. Neutralizing antibodies are detected by 21‰Ûäd.p.i. Rechallenge 10 weeks after the initial challenge results in no detectable virus replication, indicating protective immunity against homologous strains. Therefore, Asian-lineage ZIKV infection of rhesus macaques provides a relevant animal model for studying pathogenesis and evaluating potential interventions against human infection, including during pregnancy.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Although many laboratories do not have facilities to accommodate rhesus macaques, enough do that the above study indicates their suitability as animal models for Zika virus infection in pregnancy-related pathogenesis. - Mod.TY]******[6] AbortionsDate: Wed 22 Jun 2016Source: CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy) News [edited]<http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2016/06/zika-reports-note-rise-abortion-demand-eye-issues-adult>In a pair of Zika studies today [22 Jun 2016], researchers reported that requests for abortion through an online group have increased in some Latin American countries where the procedure is illegal, and a group in Brazil described eye complications in an adult man infected with the virus. Both reports were published in letters in the New England Journal of Medicine.Abortion demand in Latin America--------------------------------An unusual feature of the Zika virus outbreak is that although the disease is generally mild, it can cause severe birth defects, including microcephaly, in babies born to women infected during pregnancy. With no treatment or vaccine available, childbearing-age women have been advised to take steps to avoid mosquito bites and in some instances to postpone pregnancy. Women in some of the hard-hit countries, however, have little or no access to contraceptives or abortion.The letter on abortion is from Women on Web (WoW), which has been an option for women in Latin America for several years. The nonprofit group provides access to abortion medications through online telemedicine in countries where safe abortions aren't universally available.To see if the demand for abortion services through WoW rose after the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) issued an alert about the Zika threat in November 2015, researchers from the group and collaborators from the United States and the United Kingdom looked at requests from 1 Jan 2010-2 Mar 2016, from 19 Latin American countries. They divided the countries into 3 groups: local transmission where abortion is legally restricted; no local transmission where abortion is legally restricted, and local transmission where abortion is legally restricted and there are no national advisories.For comparison, they also examined patterns for 3 countries for which increases in Zika-based requests weren't expected: Chile, Poland, and Uruguay.Requests for WoW abortion services increased significantly in Latin American countries that warned pregnant women about Zika virus complications.The method of gauging abortion demand might underestimate the impact of country advisories, because many women may have used an unsafe method, obtained abortion drugs through other means, or visited underground providers, the group wrote. They added that accurate data on women's choice are tough to obtain, but their data provide a window on how worries about Zika virus infection may have affected pregnant women in Latin America.With World Health Organization (WHO) models estimating that 3 million to 4 million people in the Americas will be infected by Zika virus through early 2017, other countries where safe abortion access is restricted are bound to be affected, the team said. ""Official information and advice about potential exposure to the Zika virus should be accompanied by efforts to ensure that all reproductive choices are safe, legal, and accessible.""[Byline: Lisa Schnirring]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The threat of fetuses with microcephaly and other developmental problems is doubtless posing serious ethical and religious dilemmas for women infected by Zika virus during pregnancy and their families in Latin America. The prospects of having to provide life-long care for severely affected neonates, particularly for families with limited resources, poses a serious burden. Those whose religious and ethical beliefs oppose abortion are faced with a difficult choice. In many countries, abortion is illegal, further complicating decision-making. One cannot help but feel empathetic for those faced with this dilemma. - Mod.TY]
