PLoS Pathogens doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676 [edited]<http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676>Schmid MA, Glasner DR, Shah S, Michlmayr D, Kramer LD, Harris E. Mosquito Saliva Increases Endothelial Permeability in the Skin, Immune Cell Migration, and Dengue Pathogenesis during Antibody-Dependent Enhancement. PLoS Pathog 12(6): e1005676. AbstractDengue remains the most prevalent arthropod-borne viral disease in humans. While probing for blood vessels, _Aedes aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes transmit the 4 serotypes of dengue virus (DENV1-4) by injecting virus-containing saliva into the skin. Even though arthropod saliva is known to facilitate transmission and modulate host responses to other pathogens, the full impact of mosquito saliva on dengue pathogenesis is still not well understood. Inoculating mice lacking the interferon-alpha/beta receptor intradermally with DENV revealed that mosquito salivary gland extract (SGE) exacerbates dengue pathogenesis specifically in the presence of enhancing serotype-cross-reactive antibodies--when individuals already carry an increased risk for severe disease. We further establish that SGE increases viral titers in the skin, boosts antibody-enhanced DENV infection of dendritic cells and macrophages in the dermis, and amplifies dendritic cell migration to skin-draining lymph nodes. We demonstrate that SGE directly disrupts endothelial barrier function in vitro and induces endothelial permeability in vivo in the skin. Finally, we show that surgically removing the site of DENV transmission in the skin after 4 hours rescued mice from disease in the absence of SGE, but no longer prevented lethal antibody-enhanced disease when SGE was present. These results indicate that SGE accelerates the dynamics of dengue pathogenesis after virus transmission in the skin and induces severe antibody-enhanced disease systemically. Our study reveals novel aspects of dengue pathogenesis and suggests that animal models of dengue and pre-clinical testing of dengue vaccines should consider mosquito-derived factors as well as enhancing antibodies.Author SummaryMosquitoes inject saliva into the skin while probing for blood vessels. Saliva facilitates blood feeding and can contain pathogens when the mosquito is infected. In tropical regions, _Aedes_ mosquitoes transmit the 4 serotypes of dengue virus (DENV1-4) and infect almost 400 million humans every year. DENV causes severe disease especially in people who have already been exposed to a different serotype. During antibody-dependent enhancement, antibodies that were generated during the first infection bind, but do not neutralize, DENV, and instead enhance infection of immune cells. We injected mouse ears with DENV alone or with extracts from mosquito salivary glands to study the impact on disease. We found that saliva induced severe disease and death only during antibody-enhanced infection. Saliva increased DENV infection in the dermis, immune cell migration to skin and lymph nodes, and permeability of endothelial cells that line blood vessels. Removing the site of DENV inoculation in the skin rescued mice from severe disease, but this protective effect was lost when saliva was present. Our study reveals that mosquito saliva affects dendritic cell migration, increases endothelial permeability, and augments dengue disease severity. Mosquito saliva and enhancing antibodies thus need to be considered when developing vaccines and drugs against dengue.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[_Ae. aegypti_ may probe and partially feed several times on a single individual before feeding to repletion, thus increasing the amount of saliva to which an individual is exposed. It will be of interest to know which components of mosquito saliva are biologically active in promoting dengue virus infection. This will doubtless be the theme of future studies. - Mod.TY]
