KHON [edited]<http://khon2.com/2016/07/01/state-investigating-hepatitis-virus-outbreak-on-oahu/>The state Dept. of Health reported Friday [1 Jul 2016] that it is investigating a cluster of at least 12 cases of hepatitis A infection in adults on Oahu. Six have required hospitalization. Their onsets of illness have ranged from 16-27 Jun 2016.Hepatitis A is a highly contagious virus that can cause fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, abdominal discomfort, dark urine, diarrhea, and yellow skin and eyes. Symptoms typically last several weeks to as long as 2 months.The virus is found in the stool of infected persons and is usually spread by eating contaminated food or drinking water but can also be spread through close personal/sexual contact. Persons should seek medical attention immediately should they develop symptoms. Health officials aren't sure where this outbreak is coming from.The department says this is just the beginning of the outbreak, so more cases are likely to be reported. There's been no direct link to any of the infected patients so far. ""So we're asking where have you been? What kind of potlucks have you been to? What celebrations? Where do you go shopping? What foods do you commonly like to eat? So it's a lot to go over with people,"" said state epidemiologist Dr. Sarah Park.One of the problems for the health department is that the incubation period for hepatitis A is 15 to 50 days, which makes it harder for investigators to determine when the person was infected and when the contamination started. ""Sad to say that a few more people have to get sick before that might be part of a cluster, that might be related to each other to help us potentially focus in this investigation,"" said Park.Anyone who starts feeling symptoms should see their doctor right away. ""Healthcare providers have been informed and asked to notify us immediately if they have a patient they suspect may be infected,"" Park said. ""Treatment for hepatitis A infection is supportive only, and while most people will recover without complications, we are encouraging everyone to review their immunization record and talk to their healthcare provider about vaccination.""Hepatitis A vaccine is readily available at local pharmacies. Two doses of hepatitis A vaccine, given at least 6 months apart, are needed for lasting protection. ""Hepatitis A infection is a vaccine-preventable disease, and fortunately, most children and adolescents have been vaccinated as part of routine childhood vaccination recommendations,"" said Health Director Dr. Virginia Pressler. ""However, many adults have not been vaccinated and remain susceptible.""While vaccination provides the best protection, frequent hand washing with soap and warm water after using the bathroom, changing a diaper, or before preparing food can help prevent the spread of hepatitis A. Appropriately cooking foods can also help prevent infection.""Would it be a good idea to avoid raw foods such as raw fish and poke?"" KHON2 asked. ""It doesn't hurt, but it's not a complete safeguard,"" said Park. Park said cooked foods can still be contaminated if someone with the virus touches it.Hepatitis A is different from hepatitis B or C, which are more serious and are spread through the transfer of blood or body fluids.[Byline: Manolo Morales]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Universal childhood immunization in the USA would produce HAV clusters identified solely in adults. For the most part, this is often the case even without immunization, since the infection is often subclinical or anicterus in children, so many cases in pediatrics go unidentified. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/214>.]
