Lebanon Daily News [edited]<http://www.ldnews.com/story/news/local/2016/07/03/after-local-girl-gets-rabies-cat-little-information/86348654/>AS is a small, twiggy girl with a big smile. At her mother's request, she twists up her pale arm to reveal 6 bite marks. ""We were enjoying time with a friend at their home,"" her mother, MS says. ""Just out of the blue, one of the cats came and attacked my 7-year-old daughter.""They were their friend's house in North Lebanon Township. AS was playing outside in the driveway when a cat jumped out at her. ""They have stray cats that are running around. Most of them would run away from you if you came too close to them,"" says MS. The friends who own the property told her they often saw the cat wandering around their property but recently had noticed strange behavior. ""They said the cat was acting more aggressive and was wobbling around. Sometimes it would walk funny; sometimes it would walk normal. So they thought maybe it had a broken leg or something, and that's why it's attacking my daughter,"" she explained. MS was still concerned by the cat's behavior, and feared it could be rabid.Tammy Stone, a veterinarian at the Veterinary Medical Center of Lebanon, says the symptoms of rabies can drastically vary. Animals can take the ""dumb form"" with symptoms of being very lethargic. The more recognizable symptoms are hyper-aggression, drooling at the mouth, and dragging the back legs. Stone says people often assume, like MS's friends, that the animal has been hit by a car or is injured. The reality, she says, is that ""it could be because it was attacked by an animal with rabies.""Identifying suspicious symptoms can only serve as a precaution. ""The only way to know for sure if an animal is rabid is after death,"" says Stone. The animal's brain must be tested for the virus to know for sure whether the animal was rabid.MS was not going to take the risk with her daughter and took her to an emergency room. This turned out to be life-saving for her daughter. The cat was killed, taken to the state Department of Agriculture, and indeed tested positive for rabies.""I immediately took her to an urgent care which does not deal with animal bites. So then we ended up having to take her to the Hershey Medical Center for rabies vaccines and treatment,"" she says. MS's attempt to get her daughter treated was a wild goose chase, she says, because she was provided little to no support or information.""The big thing was that the (Pennsylvania) Department of Health wasn't very helpful with telling us where to go, how many injections she actually needed,"" says MS. ""The emergency room gave us wrong information; told us we needed to come back 7 days post exposure, which was incorrect."" Fortunately, AS received the proper full rabies treatment from Hershey Medical Center and is doing fine.Hershey Medical Center spokesman Megan Manlove said the hospital is unable to comment on specific cases. She said her recommendation to MS or anyone who had qualms about their treatment is that they should call their patient relations line at 717-531-6311. The patient relations department said that for legal reasons it is unable to comment.The post-exposure process MS describes is the post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) treatment for bite victims. WHO states that treatment must begin immediately after exposure to ""prevent rabies from entering the central nervous system, which would result in imminent death."" The treatment for rabies varies depending on the type of exposure. WHO breaks it down into categories:1: category I - touching or feeding animals, licks on the skin2: category II - nibbling of uncovered skin, minor scratches or abrasions without bleeding, licks on broken skin3: category III - single or multiple transdermal bites or scratches, contamination of mucous membrane with saliva from licks; exposure to bat bites or scratchesMA's bites put her into category III exposure. The treatment for this is one dose of the vaccine administered on days 0, 3, 7, 14 and 30 along with the immunoglobulin-vaccine, according to WHO. MS said this is not what she was told at the hospital. ""They gave us the information for someone who is getting the vaccines to prevent getting rabies,"" she explains. MS has a medical background as a nurse and felt something was off. ""I was like this doesn't sound correct, and then the printed instructions discharge information they gave me had conflicting information,"" she says.MS double checked with the Centers for Disease Control Prevention's website to find they had given her instructions for the preventative treatment for rabies. This only requires 3 vaccines, instead of the 5 for post-exposure. ""She would have missed one vaccine, which is..."" MS pauses and starts to get choked up ""...important because it's life-saving,"" she says finishing as tears fill up her eyes.WHO's website says that the incubation period for rabies is typically one to 3 months and can sometimes vary from one week to a year. ""As the virus spreads through the central nervous system, progressive, fatal inflammation of the brain and spinal cord develops,"" according to WHO. It describes the beginning symptoms of the disease as ""fever and often pain or an unusual or unexplained tingling, pricking or burning sensation (paraesthesia) at the wound site.""WHO points out there are 2 forms of rabies: furious rabies and paralytic rabies. The behavior associated with furious rabies includes ""signs of hyperactivity, excited behaviour, hydrophobia (fear of water) and sometimes aerophobia (fear of flying). After a few days, death occurs by cardiorespiratory arrest,"" according to the WHO.WHO studies show that paralytic rabies accounts for about 30 percent of the total number of human cases. The symptoms are less dramatic and run longer. ""The muscles gradually become paralyzed, starting at the site of the bite or scratch. A coma slowly develops, and eventually death occurs."" This form is commonly misdiagnosed, according to the WHO.""I feel bad if this was any layperson who didn't know what to do,"" says MS gravely. She says she is still shocked at the lack of information and support she received.The strain of this event fell on her friends as well. The family contacted the North Lebanon Township police, who gave the family permission to kill the cat and told them to take it to the Department of Agriculture for testing. This, however, was the only support they were provided. In an attempt to prevent further incidences, the family rounded up the rest of the stray cats in the area, not knowing which ones had been exposed. ""They basically just had to shoot them,"" says MS shaking her head, ""It was a burden on that family; they aren't hunters.""If someone you know gets attacked by a rabid animal, clean their wounds with soap and water, and take them to the nearest hospital.[Byline: Sofie Tapia]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This is a valuable piece of reporting by Ms. Tapia. Those of us dealing with zoonotic infections on a daily basis can be totally unaware of the confusion on the streets and even in medical centers, as exampled here. I ask that our subscribers check on whether their clinics and walk-in emergency units are up to date, know where the vaccine is immediately available, and are able to respond appropriately. Fortunately, this young girl was merely a statistic and not a rabies case and death.This is not to let the veterinary public health office off the hook either. Neighbors' domestic dogs and cats might have been exposed and are at risk of exposure. So local pet owners must be warned and told to get them checked and vaccinated or revaccinated. Similarly, animal control must be on the ball and able to humanely and appropriately deal with exposed feral feline populations. And the rabies virus involved needs to be genotyped so that its origin can be determined and control and surveillance programmes updated.To find Lebanon, Pennsylvania, go to: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lebanon,_Pennsylvania>. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/240>.]
