Daily Mail [edited]<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3674847/Soaring-numbers-gay-men-diagnosed-gonorrhoea-syphilis-25s-worst-spreading-chlamydia.html>Cases of syphilis in England have jumped 76 percent since 2012, alarming new figures show. The infection, which can cause stroke, paralysis, blindness, or death if left untreated, is becoming more prevalent, particularly among gay men, a report revealed today [5 Jul 2016]. Since 2012, syphilis diagnoses have risen by 76 percent (from 3001 to 5288 in 2015) and gonorrhoea by 53 percent to 41 193. Between 2014 and 2015 alone, there was a 20 percent rise in syphilis cases and an 11 percent rise in cases of gonorrhoea.The figures, published by Public Health England (PHE), show there were 434 456 sexually transmitted infections (STIs) reported in England last year [figures and tables available at <https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/sexually-transmitted-infections-stis-annual-data-tables>].Of these, 54 275 were among gay, bisexual, or other men who have sex with men, a 10 percent increase since 2014. Overall in 2015, gonorrhoea saw a 21 percent rise in cases among gay men. Gay men also saw a 19 percent increase in syphilis. The report said: 'High levels of condomless sex probably account for most of this rise.'Chlamydia was the most commonly diagnosed STI accounting for 46 percent of diagnoses (200 288 cases), followed by genital warts (68 310 cases).The 2015 statistics represent a small decrease (3 percent) when compared to 2014, which is primarily due to falls in diagnoses for chlamydia (4 percent) and genital warts (7 percent).The impact of STIs remains greatest in young people under the age of 25 years and gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men, PHE said. Young people are routinely offered chlamydia screening but only 13 percent of young men and 32 percent of young women were tested in 2015. The decrease in chlamydia diagnoses in 2015 is mainly due to a reduction in testing despite national recommendations advising young people to get tested every year or on changing partners. And the large fall in genital warts seen this year [2016] in young women is an expected positive effect of the national HPV vaccination programme, experts explained.Dr Gwenda Hughes, head of STI surveillance at PHE said: 'The new statistics show STI rates are still very high among gay men and young adults. 'We need to do more to raise awareness about STIs and how they can be prevented, especially the effectiveness of using condoms. We recommend that anyone having sex with a new or casual partner uses condoms and tests regularly for HIV and STIs. It is also vital to ensure there is easy access to STI testing and treatment services that meet the needs of local populations.'Genevieve Edwards, director of policy at Marie Stopes UK said: ""These statistics should set alarm bells ringing about the availability of sexual health services for young people and men who have sex with men. 'When a drop in chlamydia diagnosis is due to a lack of testing rather than falling incidence, we risk losing all the ground gained by years of investment in the chlamydia screening programme. This will be costly, upsetting for those affected, and a wholly preventable own-goal.'Family Planning Association (FPA) chief executive Natika Halil said: 'As we continue to hear about sexual health services being moved, restricted, or closed, we reiterate our common-sense call on the Government to prioritise investment in sexual health services in this country. Further, local authorities need to pay close attention to what is happening in their area and invest in prevention and education services to help bring down this still very high number of STIs.'Dr Michael Brady, medical director at Terrence Higgins Trust, said the figures showed there was still a lot to do to address the nation's poor sexual health and rates of STIs in those most at risk. He said they were concerned to see 'alarming inequalities' in cases of STIs across the population. 'Young people, and men who have sex with men (MSM), are still bearing the brunt of STIs and poor sexual health, with people under the age of 25 accounting for 65 percent of all new STI diagnoses last year.'[Byline: Anna Hodgekiss, Kate Pickles]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The news article above reports on the continued rising incidence of syphilis and gonococcal disease in men who have sex with men (MSM) in the UK, as is occurring in many localities in the United States and in many other countries around the world.For discussions of syphilis, chlamydia, and gonococcal disease, see my comments in prior ProMED-mail posts listed below. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/279>.]
