Wales Online [edited]<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/health/hundreds-children-vaccinated-against-hepatitis-11580095>More than 250 children have been vaccinated against the viral infection hepatitis A [HAV] following an outbreak in South Wales. Children at Ysgol Rhydygrug in Aberfan, Kidz Den After School Club and Nursery Rhymes in Treharris Community Centre have now been all vaccinated. Public Health Wales confirmed there are 17 cases of hepatitis A in South Wales. All cases have links that can be traced back to Glyn Gaer Primary School in Caerphilly where the 1st cases were identified in April 2016.Heather Lewis, consultant in health protection for Public Health Wales, said: ""We would like to thank the Cwm Taf School Nursing Team who has helped us vaccinate a large number of people in a short time scale in order to help contain this outbreak. As we have already seen in this outbreak, the infection can spread to close contacts and although we are taking every precaution to control the further spread of infection, we are likely to see additional cases before the outbreak is over.""""Although the infection is usually mild, if people develop symptoms that may be hepatitis A they should see their GP. It is important that everyone plays their part to help us prevent the virus spreading. The single most important thing everyone can do is to ensure they use good hand washing techniques after using the toilet and before preparing or eating food.""Hepatitis A vaccination is not routinely offered on the NHS as the infection is rare in the UK, with only 12 reported cases in Wales in 2015. But it is advised that anyone travelling to a country where the infection is more common, particularly Africa, northern and southern Asia, Central America and southern and eastern Europe, should receive the hepatitis A vaccination along with any other travel immunizations recommended by their GP.[Byline: Mark Smith]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is likely that there are many more cases related to the school because the infection in children is quite often either totally asymptomatic or else without jaundice. In an unimmunized population, a serosurvey for IgM-anti-HAV would confirm this. Since the outbreak curve is not reported, having cases over more than a typical incubation period of 14-50 days, usually about 28 days, would suggest household secondary cases (often in the siblings of the primary cases) or that the source of the HAV is still present. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/281>.]
