Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 28792 doi:10.1038/srep28792 [edited]<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep28792>Matthew T. Aliota, Stephen A. Peinado, Ivan Dario Velez & Jorge E. Osorio. The wMel strain of _Wolbachia_ Reduces Transmission of Zika virus by _Aedes aegypti_.AbstractZika virus (ZIKV) is causing an explosive outbreak of febrile disease in the Americas. There are no effective antiviral therapies or licensed vaccines for this virus, and mosquito control strategies have not been adequate to contain the virus. A promising candidate for arbovirus control and prevention relies on the introduction of the intracellular bacterium _Wolbachia_ into _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes. This primarily has been proposed as a tool to control dengue virus (DENV) transmission; however, evidence suggests _Wolbachia_ infections confer protection for _Ae. aegypti_ against other arboviruses. At present, it is unknown whether or not ZIKV can infect, disseminate, and be transmitted by _Wolbachia_-infected _Ae. aegypti_. Using _Ae. aegypti_ infected with the wMel strain of _Wolbachia_ that are being released in Medellin, Colombia, we report that these mosquitoes have reduced vector competence for ZIKV. These results support the use of _Wolbachia_ biocontrol as a multivalent strategy against _Ae. aegypti__-transmitted viruses.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This study represents an encouraging 1st step in the use of _Wolbachia_ to reduce vector competence of _Ae. aegypti_ for Zika virus. It will be of considerable interest to see whether this reduction continues when trials are moved from the laboratory into the field. - Mod.TY]******[3] Zika and Olympic gamesDate: Mon 27 Jun 2016Source: Travel Medicine & Infectious Disease [edited]<http://www.travelmedicinejournal.com/article/S1477-8939(16)30073-4/fulltext>Marcia C. Castro. Zika virus and the 2016 Olympic Games - Evidence-based projections derived from dengue do not support cancellation.AbstractFrom 5-21 Aug [2016] more than 10 000 athletes from about 200 countries will gather in Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil, for the 2016 Summer Olympics. Thousands of domestic and international tourists are expected to attend the games. From 7-8 Sep [2016], RJ will also host the Paralympic Games. Concern has been raised around the public health consequences of the Games, given the Zika virus (ZIKV) situation in Brazil. Calls for canceling, transferring, or postponing the games have been made, including an open letter (<https://rioolympicslater.org/>) sent to the World Health Organization (WHO).[Conclusion]To suggest that the Olympics should be moved from Brazil, canceled or postponed because of ZIKV is not based on disease knowledge and on scientific assessment. Evidence shows that the epidemiological conditions in RJ in August and September 2016 will not pose a major risk for ZIKV transmission. Yet, the WHO recommendation for pregnant women not to travel to areas with active ZIKV transmission must be followed, given the consequences of congenital ZIKV syndrome. Considering the current available knowledge, if ZIKV does spread much faster post-Olympics, it will be a result of lack of preparedness and inefficiencies in health systems and surveillance policies of individual countries.--Communicated by:Roland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[At the present time, it does not appear that the games will be called off, postponed, or moved. - Mod.TY]******[4] WHO travel health adviceDate: Wed 29 Jun 2016Source: WHO International Travel and Health [edited]<http://www.who.int/ith/updates/20160621/en/>Brazil - Health Advice for Travellers to the 2016 Summer Olympic and Paralympic GamesThe XXXI Summer Olympic and Paralympic Games Rio de Janeiro 2016, Brazil, will take place from 5 - 21 Aug 2016 and from 7 - 18 Sep 2016, respectively. Five additional cities will be hosting matches of the Olympic football [soccer] tournament: Belo Horizonte, Brasilia, Manaus, Salvador, and SÌ£o Paulo. The following recommendations are intended to advise national health authorities and health care providers about practices and measures for travellers visiting Brazil to stay safe and healthy. - Before departure, travellers should be advised about health risks in the areas they plan to visit and related preventive practices and measures to minimize the probability of acquiring diseases and of having accidents. - Travellers to Brazil should consult the travel advice issued by their national authorities. - Health authorities of Brazil provide health advice for visitors to Brazil on their website in Portuguese (see list of websites below). Health services affiliated to the public Unified Health System of Brazil (Sistema Ì nico de SaÌ¼de, SUS) are free of charge for all individuals, including visitors. Mosquito-borne diseasesPersonal protective measures:Although the risk of mosquito borne disease is lower during winter, travellers should still take personal protective measures to prevent mosquito bites. These include:- Whenever possible, wearing clothes (preferably light-coloured) that cover as much of the body as possible during the day;- Using repellents that contain DEET (diethyltoluamide), or IR 3535, or icaridin that are applied to exposed skin or to clothing and used in strict accordance with the label instructions, especially regarding the duration of protection and timing of re-application. If repellents and sunscreen are used together, sunscreen should be applied 1st and the repellent thereafter;- Choosing sanitary accommodations with piped water and physical barriers such as proper window and door screens to prevent mosquitoes from entering rooms or with air conditioning so windows and doors can stay closed;- Avoiding areas in cities and towns with no piped water and poor sanitation, which constitute ideal breeding grounds for mosquitoes.Arboviruses transmitted by _Aedes_ mosquitoesIn addition to yellow fever (see above URL for vaccination requirements), mosquito-borne diseases transmitted by _Aedes_ species mosquitoes include chikungunya, and dengue and Zika virus disease.Zika virus diseaseZika virus infection usually causes a mild disease, and many cases of Zika virus infection are asymptomatic. However, following an outbreak of Zika virus in Brazil in 2015 and its subsequent spread in the Americas, an unusual increase in serious neurological disorders was seen in the off-springs of pregnant women who had been infected, including cases of microcephaly and congenital neurological malformations. Cases of Guillain-BarrÌ© Syndrome (GBS), a rare but serious form of muscle weakness, were observed among adults. Based on a growing body of research, there is scientific consensus that Zika virus is a cause of microcephaly and Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome. Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, though sexual transmission has increasingly been documented.On the basis of current knowledge about Zika virus disease and its complications, the following is recommended to national health authorities and health care practitioners:- To provide travellers to areas of ongoing Zika virus transmission, including Brazil, with up-to-date advice on appropriate measures to reduce the risk of becoming infected, including by preventing mosquito bites and practicing safe sex (e.g. use condoms correctly and consistently); and on the potential consequences and complications of infection, especially for women who are pregnant or planning a pregnancy; non-barrier forms of birth control will not protect against sexual transmission of Zika virus infection;- To advise pregnant women not to travel to areas of ongoing Zika virus outbreaks, including Brazil;- To advise women who inadvertently become pregnant or discover they are pregnant in or shortly after returning from Brazil, and/or other areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission, to contact their health care providers;- To advise pregnant women whose sexual partners live in or travel to areas with Zika virus outbreaks to ensure safe sexual practices or abstain from sex for the duration of their pregnancy;- To advise travellers to practice safe sex or abstain from sex during their stay in Brazil, and/or other areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission, and for at least 8 weeks after their return. If men experience symptoms of Zika virus disease, they should adopt safer sex practices or abstain from sex for at least 6 months;- To advise travellers returning from Brazil, and/or other areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission, not to donate blood for at least 4 weeks after departure from the area;- To advise health care practitioners to be on alert for Zika virus disease in travellers returning from Brazil and/or other areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission;- National authorities should provide health care practitioners with clear guidance on how to refer travellers with suspected Zika virus infection for suitable clinical management and testing where appropriate.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[5] Zika virus diagnostic toolDate: Thu 16 Jun 2016Source: Analytical Chemistry [edited]<http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.analchem.6b01632>Jinzhao Song, Michael G. Mauk, Brent A. Hackett, Sara Cherry, Haim H. Bau, and Changchun Liu. Instrument-Free Point-of-Care Molecular Detection of Zika Virus.The recent outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) infection in the Americas and its devastating impact on fetal development have prompted the World Health Organization (WHO) to declare the ZIKV pandemic as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. Rapid and reliable diagnostics for ZIKV are vital because ZIKV-infected individuals display no symptoms or nonspecific symptoms similar to other viral infections. Because immunoassays lack adequate sensitivity and selectivity and are unable to identify active state of infection, molecular diagnostics are an effective means to detect ZIKV soon after infection and throughout pregnancy. We report on a highly sensitive reverse-transcription loop-mediated, isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) assay for rapid detection of ZIKV and its implementation in a simple, easy-to-use, inexpensive, point-of-care (POC) disposable cassette that carries out all the unit operations from sample introduction to detection. For thermal control of the cassette, we use a chemically heated cup without a need for electrical power. Amplification products are detected with leuco crystal violet (LCV) dye by eye without a need for instrumentation. We demonstrated the utility of our POC diagnostic system by detecting ZIKV in oral samples with sensitivity of 5 plaque-forming units (PFU) in less than 40 min. Our system is particularly suitable for resource-poor settings, where centralized laboratory facilities, funds, and trained personnel are in short supply, and for use in doctors' offices, clinics, and at home.--Communicated by:Roland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[The authors used a custom-made disposable microfluidic cassette that combines viral nucleic acid capture, concentration, and purification; isothermal amplification; and detection, utilizing reverse-transcription loop-mediated amplification (RT-LAMP). For isothermal amplification, the cassette is combined with a custom-made electricity-free cup that generates heat with an exothermic reaction and regulates temperature with a phase change material. In sensitivity tests, as few as 5 PFU of Zika virus was detected. The authors indicate that the test is specific for Zika virus because LAMP typically employs a set of 6 primers that recognize 8 different locations along the target sequence, thus its specificity is better than that of PCR, which is the gold standard, wherein the target is recognized only at 2 locations. LAMP is also highly efficient, producing a very large number of amplicons, which simplifies detection and reduces processing time compared to PCR. Since the authors did not find any reports of RT-LAMP primer designs for ZIKV, they 1st designed and verified such primers. The cost per test is estimated at USD 2.A rapid, sensitive, specific and low-cost test that can differentiate Zika, dengue and chikungunya virus infections at the point of care is urgently needed. The test that is described here appears to fit those criteria. One hopes that the next step will be field tests in parallel with the gold standard PCR. If the field trials are successful, there will need to be mass distribution with accompanying training of the medical personnel using it. - Mod.TY]******[6] Sexual transmissionDate: Sat 2 Jul 2016Source: New York Times [edited]<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/05/health/zika-virus-sex-spread.html?_r=0>An outbreak of the Zika virus in the continental United States could begin any day now. But while there is plenty of discussion about mosquito bites, some researchers are beginning to worry more about the other known transmission route: sex. Intimate contact may account for more Zika infections than previously suspected, these experts say.The evidence is still emerging, and recent findings are hotly disputed. All experts agree that mosquitoes are the epidemic's main driver. But 2 reports now suggest that women in Latin America are much more likely to be infected than men, although both are presumed to be equally exposed to mosquitoes.The gender difference appears at the age at which sexual activity begins, and then fades among older adults.Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, called the evidence ""striking."" Like other scientists, he had doubts about aspects of the data, but thought the results justified a more rigorous study, probably in Puerto Rico, of the role of sex in transmitting the Zika virus.""I can't say it's not true that women are more at risk,"" he said.The Zika virus can persist for months in semen, even in men who have had very mild infections. That's why women who are pregnant or trying to conceive are routinely warned not to have unprotected sex with men who have been in areas where the virus is spreading.Ten countries -- Argentina, Canada, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, Peru, Portugal and the continental United States -- have reported infections that were almost undoubtedly passed via sex. No case of female-to-male transmission has been documented.If sexual transmission is more common than believed, efforts to protect women may draw health officials in many of these countries into conflict with those who oppose greater access to birth control or more explicit discussion of sexual practices.In most parts of the United States, including New York City, health officials have presumed that the risk of Zika infection is low, except possibly at the peak of summer, the height of the mosquito season.But wider sexual transmission may alter that calculus. Prevention campaigns, for instance, would have to be retooled with a greater emphasis on protected sex.Thousands of men return to the United States every week from countries in which the virus circulates. New York State alone has a quarter of the country's travel-related cases.The most disputed piece in this medical puzzle is a relatively obscure study released in May 2016 by Brazilian and European biostatisticians. In Rio de Janeiro, a city of 6.4 million, they found ""a massive increase of Zika in women compared to men.""The authors, from the Getulio Vargas Foundation and other Brazilian, French and Scottish research organizations, adjusted their figures for 2 confounding factors: Pregnant women are tested for Zika more frequently than anyone else, and women generally visit doctors more often than men do.Even after removing pregnant women from the data, the researchers found women were 90 percent more likely than men their age to be infected. To adjust for doctor-visit differences, the team compared the current Zika outbreak to 2 outbreaks of dengue, which is not sexually transmitted. Even after that adjustment, said Flavio C. Coelho, a Vargas Foundation biostatistician and the lead author, women were still 60 percent more likely than men to be infected with the Zika virus. Sexual transmission, he said, ""was the most probable cause.""The paper's ""very intriguing"" conclusions ""merit further study,"" said Dr. John T. Brooks, an expert on the sexual transmission of disease at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.But other experts, including Donald A. Berry, a leading biostatistician at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, dismissed the study. Women's fear of Zika is so great, and confusion over dengue, which has similar symptoms, so common that these variables alone could have accounted for the difference in observed infections between men and women, Dr. Berry said. ""Women seek to find out whether they have Zika, while men blow it off,"" he said. ""This bias is so large that it could easily explain differences much greater than 60 percent.""The biostatistics experts at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases were also skeptical of the conclusions, Dr. Fauci said. But another study, published on 15 Jun [2016] in The New England Journal of Medicine, produced similar data.That study, by researchers at the Colombian health ministry and the CDC, was set up to look at birth defects linked to the virus. But the authors also found age and gender disparities among those infected.Young boys and girls in Colombia were infected with the Zika virus at roughly the same rates. Then, after age 15, once sexual activity began, the rates in females shot up. By age 25 to 29, women in Colombia were 3 times as likely as men of the same age to be diagnosed with Zika. As they aged, the margin tapered off; after age 65, the infection rates were close to the same again.The ""most intriguing difference,"" said Margaret A. Honein, chief of the CDC's birth defects branch and one of the study's authors, was that in Colombia, women 45 to 64 years old were still almost twice as likely as men of that age group to be infected.If large numbers of those women were still sexually active, but very few were worried about pregnancy or fetal damage, then male-to-female sexual transmission ""might be one explanation"" for the higher infection rates, she said.On the other hand, she said, ""men may just be more stubborn about seeing a doctor, while women are more sensible.""The CDC knows of just 13 sexually transmitted cases of Zika in the continental United States thus far. It does not try to count them in Puerto Rico because it cannot distinguish them from mosquito-borne cases. Because 80 percent of all infections are asymptomatic, the real number is probably higher.To find out for sure how often sex spreads the virus, researchers would need to choose hundreds of men and women at random and quiz them about how often they were bitten by mosquitoes, how often and with whom they had sex, and how readily they sought medical care, among other factors. Then their blood would have to be tested for the infection. It might not be possible to do that survey, Dr. Fauci said.Not only has Congress been reluctant to authorize more spending on Zika prevention, but the most practical tests for such surveys -- antibody tests -- are the least accurate for Zika infections, because earlier infections with dengue or yellow fever create false positives.Scientists have documented similar age disparities in HIV infections in Africa, where the gap clearly indicates sexual transmission. In some African cities, teenage girls are 5 times as likely as boys their age to be infected with HIV, according to UNICEF.In that epidemic, the difference is driven by infected older men having sex with younger women through rape, incest or ""sugar daddy"" relationships.There is no evidence that sexual transmission played an important role in the 1st modern Zika outbreaks, in 2007 on Yap Island in Micronesia and in 2013 in French Polynesia.CDC tests on Yap blood samples found infections slightly higher overall in males. But they were not broken down by age.In Polynesia, ""we did not find any evidence of a sex difference in our 1st seroprevalence surveys,"" said Dr. Henri-Pierre Mallet, an epidemiologist in that French territory's health department.However, both those outbreaks spread extremely rapidly and died out within months, so swarms of mosquitoes may have simply overwhelmed signs that sex also served as a driver of those epidemics.[Byline: Donald G. McNeil Jr.] --Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The significance of sexual transmission as an important driver of Zika virus outbreaks awaits further study. Because such a large proportion of Zika virus infections are asymptomatic, quantifying sexual transmission will not be easy, especially in localities where mosquito transmission is occurring as well. Until there is additional information about the persistence of virus in semen, it will not be possible to provide accurate advice about the time interval when abstinence or practice of protected sex is needed. - Mod.TY]******[7] Microcephaly mechanismDate: Thu 12 May 2016Source: The Lancet [edited]<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30062-7> Edward R Blonz. Zika virus and GLUT1--------------------------------SummaryAttention remains focused on the possible role of Zika virus in the pathogenesis of fetal microcephaly in Brazil. Tom Solomon and colleagues posed the question of nutrient deficiency. Glucose is the primary source of metabolic energy for the developing placenta and fetus. GLUT1, a membrane-bound protein, is the main glucose transporter across the blood-brain barrier, and the placenta. Of compelling relevance, a genetic GLUT1 deficiency is associated with an increased risk of microcephaly. Additionally, both viral modulation of glucose transporters and microcephaly following intrauterine viral infection have been reported.[Discussion]Reports of the 2007 Zika outbreak in Micronesia made no mention of an increased incidence of microcephaly. A retrospective analysis of the 2013 French Polynesian outbreak documented an incidence of microcephaly much lower than that reported in Brazil. Of note is that, unlike Brazil, coconut is a food staple in that part of the world. Although speculative at this point, the habitual intake of GLUT1-independent medium-chain triglycerides from coconut might have mitigated the impact of the Zika virus in those outbreaks. The question then becomes whether sources of metabolic energy not reliant on GLUT1 functionality could help protect the fetuses of at-risk women in the current Zika epidemic. Micronesian and French Polynesian experiences could serve as working models to address concerns.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Now that animal models of Zika virus infection in monkeys and mice have been developed, it may be possible to test this hypothesis experimentally. - Mod.TY]
