Arizona Daily Sun [edited]<http://azdailysun.com/news/local/rabbit-fever-death-confirmed-in-coconino-county/article_f00711cf-ff4a-5ef3-8622-1bba095b05bc.html>An individual in the Flagstaff area that contracted tularemia, also known as rabbit fever or deer fly fever, has died from the illness, the Coconino County public health department announced Thu 7 Jul 2016. This is the first confirmed case of tularemia in Coconino County in 2016 and the first fatal case in more than a decade. There have been 4 human cases of tularemia in Coconino County since 2005, 2 confirmed cases in 2005 and 2 in 2015, none of which were fatal.Tularemia is a bacterial disease that infects rabbits and other mammals. It does not spread from person to person but can be transmitted to humans through the skinning and cleaning of game animals, usually rabbits, through deer fly and tick bites, by eating or drinking contaminated food or water or by pets who have contracted the disease.In Arizona, tularemia activity occurs in elevations above 3000 feet. The disease can be severe and fatal if not treated properly and immediately with antimicrobial therapy.A person infected with tularemia may show a variety of symptoms, including an ulcer or sore at the site of exposure, painful swelling of regional lymph nodes (usually in the armpit, elbow, groin, or neck area), fever, chills, headache, muscle aches and nausea. Tularemia-like symptoms appear 1 to 14 days, but usually 3 to 5 days, after skinning game, or after being bitten by deer flies or ticks. People can also develop pneumonia and may have symptoms including chest pain, bloody sputum and trouble breathing.The Coconino County Public Health Services District recommends the following illness prevention guidelines:- Avoid contact with wild animals.- Do not handle sick or dead animals.- Wear protective equipment, such as gloves and mask when hunting and handling animals.- Protect against insect bites when hiking, camping or working outdoors. Wear insect repellent containing DEET or treat clothing with repellent containing permethrin.- Do not drink untreated water.- Avoid exposure to rodent burrows, fleas and ticks. Stay out of areas wild rodents inhabit.- Prevent pets from roaming loose. Pets can pick up the infected fleas or ticks from wild animals, and then pass fleas on to their human owners. De-flea pets routinely.- Take sick pets (dogs and cats) to a veterinarian.- Seek care from a health care provider if experiencing symptoms.[Byline: Emery Cowan]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Tularemia is a classic zoonosis, capable of being transmitted by aerosol, direct contact, ingestion, or arthropods. Inhalation of aerosolized organisms (as in the laboratory or as an airborne agent in an act of bioterrorism) can produce a pneumonic form. Direct contact with or ingestion of infected carcasses of wild animals (such as cottontail rabbits) can produce the ulceroglandular, oculoglandular, oropharyngeal (local lesion with regional inflammation of a lymph node), or typhoidal form. Immersion in or ingestion of contaminated water can result in infection in aquatic animals. Ticks can maintain infection transstadially and transovarially. Transstadial transmission occurs when a pathogen remains with the vector from one life stage (""stadium"") to the next. Transovarial or transovarian transmission occurs in certain arthropod vectors as they transmit disease-causing bacteria from parent arthropod to offspring arthropod, which makes them an efficient reservoir as well as a vector. Recognized vectors in the USA include _Dermacentor andersoni_ (wood tick), _Amblyomma americanum_ (lone star tick), _Dermacentor variabilis_ (dog tick), and _Chrysops discalis_ (deer fly).The infection does not spread from person to person essentially in contradiction to another Category A bioterrorism agent, _Yersinia pestis_, in which the pneumonic form can easily be transmitted_F. tularensis_ infection can present in a variety of ways depending on the route of acquisition. Even before the antimicrobial era, pneumonia due to inhalation of _Francisella tularensis_ seemed to account for most of the deaths related to the infection (1). A good review of the subject written by Thomas and Schaffner can be found in reference 2.References1. Foshay L: Cause of death in tularemia. Arch Intern Med. 1937;60: 22-38.2. Thomas LD, Schaffner W: Tularemia pneumonia. Infect Dis N Am 2010;24: 43-55. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/207>.]
