USA Today [edited]<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2015/07/02/measles-death-washington-state/29624385/>The USA has suffered its first measles death in 12 years, according to Washington state health officials.The woman's measles was undetected and confirmed only through an autopsy, according to the Washington State Department of Health. The woman's name was not released, but officials said she lived in Clallam County.The woman was probably exposed to measles at a medical facility during a measles outbreak this spring, according to the health department. She was at the hospital at the same time as a patient who later developed a rash and was diagnosed with measles. Patients with measles can spread the virus even before showing symptoms. The woman, who died of pneumonia, had other health conditions and was taking medications that suppressed her immune system, the health department said.Pneumonia is one of several serious common complications of measles and the most common cause of death from the virus, said William Schaffner, a professor at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville. Measles kills 1 or 2 children out of every 1000 infected, according to the CDC.It's not surprising that the woman had no obvious measles symptoms; people with compromised immune systems often don't develop a rash when infected with the virus, said Paul Offit, chief of infectious disease at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.The woman's death was a preventable, but predictable, consequence of falling vaccination rates, said Peter Hotez, president of the Sabin Vaccine Institute and Texas Children's Hospital Center for Vaccine Development in Houston. Measles has surged back in recent years as groups of like-minded parents have opted against fully vaccinating their children. Last year, 644 people contracted the virus. A measles outbreak that began at Disneyland over the Christmas holidays in December spread across the country, including to Washington state. So far this year, 178 people have been diagnosed with measles, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Some states have reacted to the outbreaks by passing laws to require more children to be vaccinated. Both California and Vermont this year repealed exemptions that allowed unvaccinated children to attend school because of their parents' personal beliefs.A USA TODAY investigation earlier this year found that Washington's vaccination levels may not be high enough to prevent outbreaks. Communities need to vaccinate at least 92 percent of children to prevent outbreaks, said Robert Glatter, an emergency physician at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. In Washington state in 2013-2014, one-third of the 1634 schools with kindergartens had vaccination levels for kindergartners under 90 per cent, USA TODAY found. An additional 263 schools did not have up-to-date vaccination records for that school year when the state provided USA TODAY data this February. The statewide vaccination rate for the nearly 84 000 kindergartners whose records were collected was 89.5 percent.Before vaccines were available, the disease struck 3 million to 4 million Americans a year, hospitalizing 48 000 and killing 500. During the last major measles epidemic, from 1989 to 1991, measles infected 55 000 people and killed 166. The outbreak spurred the CDC to increase the recommended number of measles shots for children from 1 to 2. The measure dramatically cut the number of measles cases, which hovered around 60 a year until recently.Measles remains a leading killer of children elsewhere in the world, killing nearly 146 000 in 2013, according to the World Health Organization.People with compromised immune systems are at high risk from measles. They often can't be vaccinated. Or, if they are vaccinated, their bodies don't respond in a way that protects them from disease, according to the Washington state health department. There are hundreds of thousands of these patients in the USA, and they depend on others around them to get vaccines, Offit said. ""It's not your right to catch and transmit a potentially fatal infection,"" Offit said.By keeping overall levels of measles low, vaccinated people create a wall of protection that prevents disease among vulnerable people, including babies too young to have received their first shots, said William Schaffner, a professor at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville. ""We are responsible not only for our health but for the health of those around us,"" Schaffner said. ""The only way we can protect them from these disease is if we are vaccinated.""Pediatrician Richard Pan, a California state senator who championed his state's tougher vaccine law, said the woman's death shows why vaccines are vital. Opponents of the law already have mounted an effort to repeal the legislation, which was signed by Gov. Jerry Brown Tue [5 July 2016].""I'm so sorry to hear about this preventable tragedy,"" Pan said. ""All the more reason we must be vigilant about stopping these deadly diseases now. In my own state, a child is currently in hospice because of a measles complication. This is exactly why the law I wrote needs to take effect.""Measles is one of the most contagious viruses and spreads easily when infected people breathe, cough or sneeze. People who aren't protected -- because they haven't had measles or a vaccine -- can contract the virus even 2 hours after an infectious person leaves the room. The last confirmed measles death in the United States was reported in 2003, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ""These are communicable diseases,"" Schaffner said. ""They don't just happen to me. They can be spread to others, often unknowingly so.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This sad and unnecessary death points to the importance of vaccination. A total of 14 scientific studies have failed to find a link between autism and vaccines, says Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Center at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.The myth was fueled by a small, flawed study in The Lancet in 1998, which was later retracted. British medical authorities in 2010 found the author guilty of serious misconduct related to the study -- including accepting more than USD 675 000 from a lawyer hoping to sue vaccine makers -- and banned him from practicing medicine in England.Editors of BMJ, formerly known as the British Medical Journal, called the study ""an elaborate fraud,"" accusing author Andrew Wakefield of deliberately falsifying medical data.In 2011, a U.S. ""vaccine court"" handling the Omnibus Autism Proceeding, in which judges considered lawsuits from roughly 5000 families, ruled against parents who claimed that shots caused their children's autism.But myths, once unleashed, can be hard to rein in, says Seth Mnookin, an assistant professor of science writing at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He wrote the book The Panic Virus: The True Story of the Vaccine-Autism Controversy. ""This idea has been set in people's minds, and it's going to take a while to overcome it,"" Mnookin says. ""I talk to people who look at the research and say, 'I just don't trust it.' But for this to be a conspiracy, it would have to be virtually every government in the world.""From <http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2015/02/06/debunking-vaccine-myths/22886985/>.A map of Washington in the USA can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/248>. - Mod LK]******[2] New Zealand (Manawatu-Wanganui): measles suspectedDate: Wed 6 Jul 2016Source: Manawatu Standard [edited]<http://www.stuff.co.nz/manawatu-standard/news/81801977/suspected-measles-case-closes-second-palmerston-north-school>A suspected measles case has closed a 2nd Palmerston North school. Riverdale School, in Awapuni, will be closed on Wed [6 Jul 2016], after a person who has been at the school was suspected of having the measles.Cornerstone Christian School in Kelvin Grove was closed on Fri[1 Jul 2016] after a confirmed case of measles, and a suspected case closed Palmerston North Girls' High School and Levin East School for a day in Jun 2016, while both Waiopehu College and Levin Intermediate each closed for a day in May following several confirmed cases among students.Riverdale principal Debra Peck said the person concerned was at school this week before signs of any infection were showing. ""I have been advised that during this time this person could have been infectious and is now in isolation. In the circumstances we have no option other than to close the school tomorrow, Wed 6 July. We are informing our parents through a newsletter, along with messages on the school website and the school app.""Tests will confirm if the case is measles, or not, by Thu 7 Jul [2016]. Peck said, in the meantime, the public health service was assessing the vaccination status of all Riverdale students using the National Immunisation Database and the school information that parents have provided. ""If the results confirm measles, those students without evidence of 2 doses of MMR will need to stay in isolation until informed further. In most cases isolation will be required until the end of the school holidays."" Students with evidence of immunity will be able to return to school by Thu 7 Jul [2016] .MidCentral District Health Board medical officer of health Dr Rob Weir said measles was very infectious and anyone who was not immune was at risk if they came into contact with the disease. It spreads from person to person through the air via breathing, coughing and sneezing, and contact with those secretions. The illness usually starts between 10 and 14 days after contact with the measles virus. Measles symptoms include: fever, runny nose, cough, and sore red eyes. After 3-5 days a rash appears on the head and spreads down the body. The disease is contagious from just before symptoms begin until about 5 days after the onset of the rash.[Byline: Paul Mitchell]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Manawatu-Wanganui is a region in the lower half of the North Island of New Zealand.Measles is contagious from 4 days before until 4 days after the rash appears. It can cause life-threatening pneumonia and brain inflammation, middle-ear infection, severe diarrhea, and sometimes death. It is important to be vaccinated. See previous posts on measles in New Zealand as listed below in See Also sectionA map of New Zealand may be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/164>. - Mod.LK]
