ABC 7 News [edited]<http://abc7chicago.com/news/woman-attacked-by-rabid-bat-in-crete/1419607/>A woman suffered 2 bites when she was attacked by a bat in south suburban Crete. Will County officials said the woman was cleaning a swimming pool when the bat bit her on the neck and hand. While trying to protect herself from the attack, the woman injured the bat and it fell to the ground. The bat was picked up by Will County Animal Control. Officials said it tested positive for rabies and the woman was sent to a local hospital for treatment.Officials said July, August and September are prime months for area bat exposures, and this is the 3rd rabid bat reported in Will County.Residents are asked to contact local animal control if any wild animal is seen acting abnormally, such as a nocturnal animal walking around during daylight hours, or an animal having trouble walking. Will County officials said that any contact with a bat, or other wild warm-blooded animals, should be reported to the nearest animal control authority as soon as possible.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>*****[2] Maryland - catDate: Sat 9 Jul 2016, 9:00am ETSource: Annapolis patch [edited]<http://patch.com/maryland/annapolis/rabid-cat-found-glen-burnie>Anne Arundel County Department of Health officials are seeking anyone who may have recently come in contact with a cat found near Hamlen Road in Glen Burnie. The grey and black tiger-striped domestic shorthair tabby cat was found Thu [7 Jul 2016] in the Munroe Gardens community. Authorities say the cat tested positive for rabies.Preventive treatment might be required for anyone who handled or fed the cat. Rabies is a fatal disease, and vaccines must be started as soon as possible. The Department of Health urges county residents not to feed stray or wild animals or leave food dishes outside. Pet owners should also keep their animals' rabies vaccinations current.[Byline: Deb Belt]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>*****[3] New Jersey - raccoon, catDate: Tue 12 Jul 2016, 11:41am ETSource: Woodbridge Patch [edited]<http://patch.com/new-jersey/woodbridge/man-scratched-raccoon-rabies-found-highland-park>A raccoon found in Highland Park has tested positive for rabies, the Middlesex County Office of Health services said Tuesday morning. That raccoon was involved in an altercation with a house cat, which subsequently scratched its owner, and that person may receive rabies post-exposure treatment as well, the county health department said.This is the 12th rabid animal reported in Middlesex County so far in 2016. Other recent cases include a family's pet pig that was attacked by a rabid groundhog in Old Bridge on 29 Jun [2016]. A total of 4 people were exposed to rabies in that incident as well, and are being monitored for the virus. Also on 29 Jun, 2 dogs got into a fight with a rabid raccoon in Spotswood.Back to the Highland Park incident: on Saturday, 2 Jul [2016], a raccoon was found to be acting strangely in a resident's yard near the owner's pet cat. This was in the vicinity of Harrison Ave and Madison Ave. The cat became involved in an altercation with the raccoon, and subsequently the cat also scratched the owner. The raccoon was killed and sent to the New Jersey Department of Health Laboratory for testing. It was reported on Thu 7 Jul [2016] that the animal tested positive for rabies. The cat at the residence is considered exposed to this animal and has been placed under a 45-day quarantine. The county notified the resident to consult with a physician regarding potential rabies post exposure treatment.Highland Park residents should expect to see county health workers handing out rabies fact sheets in the area this week. The animals that most commonly carry rabies are: bats, raccoons, skunks, groundhogs, foxes, cats, and dogs.[Byline: Carly Baldwin]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>****[4] New York - rescued wildlifeDate: Wed 13 Jul 2016Source: The Buffalo News [edited]<http://live.buffalonews.com/2016/07/13/orphaned-animals-lead-rabies-shots-among-residents/>Lili Dobreva was cleaning out a rental house last month [Jun 2016] when her eyes fell on a black, furry shape lying in the driveway. It turned out to be a baby skunk the size of her hand. When Dobreva poked it with a piece of wood, it started moving its mouth and paws. ""Honestly, it looked like a little stuffed toy,"" she said. ""It was so adorable."" Dobreva carried the abandoned creature - clearly sick and missing an eye - to the porch and rinsed the fly and maggot eggs from its ears and remaining eye and gave it water. Then she spent half an hour making calls to try to get it some help. What the 19-year-old didn't realize was she had condemned the skunk to death the moment she touched it. She also put her own health at risk.Last month, 75 residents were referred to Erie County Medical Center for rabies exposure vaccinations, the most of any June in 5 years. The county had 61 vaccination referrals during the 1st 5 months of the year [2016].Wildlife and health experts worry about what will happen the rest of the summer. The region's mild winter has prompted concern from officials at the Erie County Health Department, the SPCA Serving Erie County and the state Department of Environmental Conservation, who have met over the heightened rabies exposure this summer. ""The cases are just so many and so fast, we all wanted to be on the same page,"" said Peter Tripi, a Health Department senior public health sanitarian. ""The more people are exposing themselves, the more it scares us.""The specter of rabies exposure has made health and wildlife officials more intent on spreading a public service message urging people not to touch wild animals without expert assistance, to vaccinate their domesticated pets, and to find more people willing to get special wildlife rehabilitation certification to help save high-risk rabies species like raccoons.Good intentions---------------Health Department data does not indicate more animals than usual are testing positive for rabies. But the mild winter may have led more animals than usual to have bigger and healthier litters. In some cases, health and SPCA officials say, mothers are giving birth, and then succumbing to rabies, orphaning their young. In other cases, people assume young animals have been abandoned because they don't see the parent nearby, but that may not be the case.From May through June, the SPCA took in roughly 45 juvenile, rabies-vulnerable animals. The Health Department euthanized and tested at least another 44. Most were young raccoons and foxes. Raccoons, foxes, skunks and bats are more vulnerable to rabies than other animals. But symptoms may not surface for days. They also have the potential to transmit rabies to their offspring through their saliva.The urge to pick up and tend to cute, helpless animals seems irresistible. ""Unfortunately, if somebody does have contact with a rabies vector species, it's a death sentence for that animal,"" said SPCA wildlife specialist Barbara Haney. The only way to test an animal for rabies is to examine its brain tissue.After Dobreva told the SPCA she found and handled a sick baby skunk, the SPCA referred her to a Health Department employee who asked her to leave the baby skunk in a box on the porch and to wash her hands. A few days later, the employee called her back and told her the skunk did not have rabies and she didn't need to get vaccinated. He also broke the news that testing the skunk for rabies required having to euthanize it. ""I started blubbering like a whale,"" said Dobreva. ""I had no idea.""Taking no chances-----------------The rabies virus is most commonly transmitted through a bite and is otherwise fairly difficult to contract. But if a human is infected with the virus and begins showing symptoms, the disease is almost always fatal. For that reason, wildlife and health agencies follow conservative protocols and urge people not to touch any wild creature before speaking to someone from the SPCA, Health Department or DEC for advice and instructions.Last month [Jun 2016], an injured young fox was treated by the SPCA and seemed to be recovering well until it started showing neurological symptoms of rabies - walking in circles, acting confused, Haney said. Only specially trained people had direct contact with the fox, but the organization became worried about other volunteers who cleaned the fox's cage and washed its food dishes without gloves. A total of 17 volunteers ultimately received rabies exposure vaccinations as a precaution.Rabid pets----------One Town of Aurora family went through the series of rabies vaccination shots last month after being bitten and scratched by their family cat Kitty. ""It was rough,"" said Mark, a West Falls resident who asked that his last name not be used to protect his family's privacy. The family's story is a cautionary tale for those who think an unvaccinated house pet is safe from rabies exposure.The family had owned Kitty for 13 years but did not vaccinate her because she never went outside, he said. But one day, Kitty suddenly bolted through an open door while the family was letting the dogs out. The cat remained missing for 2 months.Mark's 11-year-old son finally found the cat in bushes by a neighbor's house in May and brought it inside. For several days, all seemed well. Kitty gained weight and seemed like her old, affectionate self for the thrilled family, he said. Then Mark got a text message at work from his wife, who said the cat was acting crazy and had bitten both his son and wife. The next day, the cat dove under their bed at 3 a.m. and Mark went to get her. The cat bit him on the wrist. Then she started charging at him and antagonizing the dogs. Mark carried a broom with him to defend himself. He isolated the cat in the basement, and then moved her into a dog crate in the garage that night.The next day Mark called the Health Department. The cat died later that day and tested positive for rabies. The family of 5 trekked to ECMC for the 1st of 4 rounds of shots. The 1st round was the worst. Mark endured eight shots in his shoulders and thighs the 1st visit, a combination of the rabies vaccine and rabies immunoglobulin - a short-term, protective booster that protects the body from the rabies virus until the vaccine itself gains full effectiveness. The number of shots a person gets on the first visit depends on the person's weight. ""It seemed like you were walking with a charley horse all day,"" Mark said. ""We were all kind of sore and achy.""Tripi, the Health Department administrator, said that every domesticated cat, dog and ferret should receive the rabies vaccine. Mark's story shows why even the most sheltered pets - cats, in particular - can run the risk of exposure to the disease. He also pointed out that cost should not be a barrier for anyone. The Health Department offers free rabies vaccination clinics throughout the year. The next set of free vaccination clinics are scheduled for Sept. 14, 20 and 28 in Amherst, Springville and West Seneca, respectively.Doomed raccoons---------------Not every animal can be helped - particularly raccoons. Animals considered to be at highest risk for rabies must be referred to a wildlife rehabilitator with advanced certification, and not enough local people have it, said Haney, the SPCA wildlife biologist.""We have people in our area who can rehabilitate bats,"" she said. ""Some will do skunks. We have no one in Erie County who does wildlife rehabilitation for raccoons. ""That's a serious problem for dedicated animal lovers like Haney. The SPCA accepted 48 raccoons in May and June - none of them improperly handled by people - and 36 of them were considered orphaned young. It's likely their mothers died of rabies. But they suffered the same fate - they were all euthanized. ""This is what we're going through right now,"" Haney said. ""It's horrible for us.""Haney made an appeal for anyone interested in becoming a wildlife rehabilitator and gaining raccoon licensing. It's not a quick or easy process, she said, but the SPCA would gladly assist anyone interested in undertaking the process.Meanwhile, people should leave young raccoons alone. ""The best option is to leave them in the woods and hope that they make it,"" said Ken Baginski, regional wildlife manager for the DEC. ""Nature is cruel sometimes.""[Byline: Sandra Tan]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[For information on wildlife reservoirs of rabies in the USA, go to <http://www.cdc.gov/rabies/exposure/animals/wildlife_reservoirs.html>. - Mod.PMBA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/216>.]
