The Lancet DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30193-1 [edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(16)30193-1/fulltext>Nadia Prisant, Louis Bujan, HÌ©lÌ¬ne Benichou, Pierre-Humbert Hayot, Lynda Pavili, Sylvia Lurel, Cecile Herrmann, Eustase Janky, Guillaume Joguet. Zika virus in the female genital tract.The 1st human Zika virus infection was documented in Nigeria in 1954, with very few documented infections after this initial report, until the virus outbreak in 2007 on Yap Island in the western Pacific Ocean. The infection is usually asymptomatic but symptoms can consist of fever, maculopapular rash, arthralgia, and conjunctivitis.Zika virus infection has been associated with adverse fetal outcomes, including congenital microcephaly, and could lead to pregnancy loss, as was described in a mouse model. Presence of Zika virus has been shown in amniotic fluid, which suggests that the virus can cross the placental barrier. Zika virus has been isolated from several other body fluids, including blood, urine, saliva, breastmilk, and semen. Presence of Zika virus in semen was reported after infection and has been shown to persist even after it is undetectable in blood or urine. Sexual transmission has been described in several publications, as man-to-woman or man-to-man transmission.However, no data are available on the presence of Zika virus in the female genital tract. Thus, the detection of Zika virus in the female genital tract, its clearance kinetics, and its possible persistence would be of utmost importance in the assessment of woman-to-man sexual transmission of the Zika virus, and it could also help clarify the process of mother-to-child vertical transmission.We describe the case of a woman (aged 27 years) whose Zika virus infection was identified in May 2016, at the Pointe ÌÊ Pitre University Hospital (Guadeloupe, France) -- an official area of Zika virus outbreak since late April 2016.The patient presented with clinical symptoms of fever, maculopapular rash, and conjunctivitis, typical of an arbovirus infection, and recovered within a few days. Molecular tools were used to rapidly diagnose Zika virus infection (RealStar Zika Virus RT-PCR Kit 1.0; Altona Diagnostics GmbH, Hamburg, Germany), and the patient tested positive for Zika virus in the blood sample and negative in the urinary sample.The patient was monitored for oocyte cryopreservation, because we follow the French Agence de la Biomedecine (ABM) recommendations for infertile patients in Zika virus-infected areas. Her stimulation protocol was then terminated and she agreed to continue with the ABM recommendations of safe sex with systematic condom use.A genital swab, an endocervical swab, and a cervical mucus sample were collected for RNA Zika virus analysis 3 days after the onset of symptoms; these samples were all positive for the presence of Zika virus RNA. On day 11 after the onset of symptoms, the patient's blood and urinary samples tested negative, whereas her cervical mucus still tested positive for the presence of Zika virus RNA.We report for the 1st time the presence of Zika virus in the genital tract of a woman who was infected with Zika virus, and its possible genital persistence after its disappearance from blood and urine samples.Although we have not tested the infectiousness of a locally situated vaginal virus, its very presence in the female genital tract poses notable challenges, implying that sexual transmission from women to men could occur, as is the case for other viral infections. Zika virus presence in the female genital tract also means that vertical transmission from mother to fetus needs to be assessed, since this virus is a member of the Flaviviridae family, which includes hepatitis C, in which vertical transmission from mother to child can occur in up to 10 percent of pregnancies.The duration of Zika virus persistence in the female genital tract and its clearance after the disappearance of the symptoms are unknown. Mirroring what was reported in the male genital tract, a possible dissociation between blood and genital samples of RNA results could occur.Our findings raise the threat of a woman potentially becoming a chronic Zika virus carrier, with the female genital tract persistently expressing the virus RNA. Additional studies are underway to answer those essential questions and to assess what would then be the consequences for women of child-bearing age.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The finding of Zika virus in female genital tract secretions adds a new dimension to the virus-host relationship. It raises questions about the proportion of Zika virus infected women who have virus in their genital tracts, the risk of transmission to their fetuses in utero or during birth, and of transmission to male sexual partners. One hopes that additional prospective studies will answer these questions. - Mod.TY]******[3] Persistence in semenDate: Wed 6 Jul 2016Source: Bull. WHO E-Pub [edited]<http://www.who.int/bulletin/online_first/16-181370.pdf>Huits RMHG, De Smet B, AriÌÇn KK, Van Esbroeck M, de Jong BC, Bottieau E et al. Kinetics of Zika virus persistence in semen.AbstractObjectiveInterim guidelines to prevent sexual transmission of Zika virus (ZIKV) do not recommend diagnostic testing, because the knowledge of viral kinetics in semen after acute infection is limited. We studied the presence and duration of ZIKV in semen after onset of symptoms. MethodsA prospective observational cohort study (NCT 02733796) is ongoing to determine the presence, persistence and kinetics of ZIKV in semen of men with confirmed ZIKV infection after returning from areas with vector-borne transmission. ZIKV RT-PCR is performed in weekly semen samples until ZIKV is no longer detectable. The main endpoint is the proportion of ZIKV positive semen samples over time after acute ZIKV infection. We report preliminary findings after enrolment of the 1st 4 patients.FindingsSemen of 2 out of 4 immunocompetent men with symptomatic ZIKV infection tested positive for ZIKV-RNA by RT-PCR. ZIKV levels in semen declined to undetectable after 68 and 56 days respectively, suggesting elimination of the virus.ConclusionOur findings indicate that presence and persistence of ZIKV in semen after acute infection appear common. Algorithms can be developed that incorporate ZIKV-specific molecular and antibody detection assays and subsequent testing for ZIKV in semen of selected men. We suggest that future guidelines to prevent sexual transmission of ZIKV, adopt diagnostic testing of both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals returning from endemic areas. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[Although the number of individuals tested and having Zika virus in their semen was small, slowly the days of virus persistence in semen is beginning to be quantified. Although too early to make definitive recommendations, so far it appears that 90 days of protected sex or of abstinence may be enough time to avoid transmission to partners. - Mod.TY]******[4] Severe thrombocytopeniaDate: Thu 14 Jul 2016Source: Clinical Infectious Diseases doi: 10.1093/cid/ciw476 [edited]<http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2016/07/13/cid.ciw476.abstract>AbstractWe report 2 patients who developed severe thrombocytopenia after Zika virus infection. The 1st had 1000 platelets/mm^3, and died following multiple hemorrhages. The 2nd had 2000 platelets/mm^3, melena, ecchymoses, and recovered after receiving intravenous immunoglobulin. Physicians should be aware that Zika virus may be associated with immune-mediated severe thrombocytopenia.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Zika virus has not been associated with hemorrhagic disease previously. Clinicians seeing patients in areas of Zika virus transmission need to become aware of these 2 cases of thrombocytopenia. It will be interesting to see if similar cases are detected in the future. - Mod.TY]******[5] Monitoring Olympic athletesDate: Tue 5 Jul 2016Source: NIH Press Relase [edited]<https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-funds-zika-virus-study-involving-us-olympic-team>Researchers supported by the National Institutes of Health will monitor potential Zika virus exposure among a subset of athletes, coaches and other U.S. Olympic Committee (USOC) staff attending the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics in Brazil. The study, funded by NIH's Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and led by Carrie L. Byington, M.D., from the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, aims to improve understanding of how the virus persists in the body and to identify potential factors that influence the course of infection.""Zika virus infection poses many unknown risks, especially to those of reproductive age,"" said Catherine Y. Spong, M.D., acting director of NICHD. ""Monitoring the health and reproductive outcomes of members of the U.S. Olympic team offers a unique opportunity to answer important questions and help address an ongoing public health emergency.""USOC established an Infectious Disease Advisory Group (IDAG), chaired by Dr. Byington, to help prepare the U.S. Olympic team for travel to Brazil, which is the epicenter of the Zika virus outbreak in the Americas. Dr. Byington proposed the project, which aims to enroll at least 1000 men and women, in response to an NIH announcement designed to expedite review and funding for Zika-related research projects.""We partnered with the USOC [US Olympic Committee] to improve knowledge of the dynamics of Zika infection, so that we can better protect the health of athletes and staff who will participate in the 2016 Games,"" said Dr. Byington. ""This ongoing relationship also opens avenues for long-term research that promises to benefit not only the Americas, but also other regions facing the emergence of the virus.""The current study seeks to determine the incidence of Zika virus infection, identify potential risk factors for infection, detect where the virus persists in the body (blood, semen, vaginal secretions or saliva), evaluate how long the virus remains in these fluids, and study the reproductive outcomes of Zika-infected participants for up to one year.To prepare, USOC and the University of Utah conducted a pilot study in March and April 2016. The study was fully enrolled in 2 days and included 150 participants. Notably, 1/3 of the pilot group indicated that they or their partner planned to become pregnant within 12 months of the Olympic Games.Participants in the current study will complete health surveys and provide samples of bodily fluids for the detection of Zika and similar flaviviruses, such as dengue. Zika virus infection typically does not cause symptoms in adults, so routine sampling will detect asymptomatic infections and help shed light on symptomatic versus asymptomatic infections. Zika virus testing kits and training on how to use the tests will be provided by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Before traveling to Brazil, all USOC staff, including athletes and coaches, will be briefed on a number of items, including the Zika outbreak. IDAG will provide educational materials to athletes and staff and answer questions. During this time, the NIH-funded researchers will present the study and enroll as well as consent USOC staff who are interested in participating. Approximately 3000 USOC staff members are expected to travel to Brazil. In addition, spouses or sexual partners who are traveling to Brazil may be eligible to participate.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The Olympic Games provide a unique opportunity to prospectively study a large group of susceptible people at risk of Zika virus infections. However, Brazilian health authorities have pointed out that the game will occur during the cooler season in Rio de Janeiro when _Aedes aegypti_ are less abundant and less active. August-September certainly has fewer dengue cases there than earlier in the year. This mosquito transmits both viruses.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Brazil can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>. - Mod.TY]******[6] Risk of spread from Olympic GamesDate: Wed 13 Jul 2016Source: CDC MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ePub. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6528e1 [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6528e1.htm?s_cid=mm6528e1_e>Grills A, Morrison S, Nelson B, Miniota J, Watts A, Cetron MS. Projected Zika Virus Importation and Subsequent Ongoing Transmission after Travel to the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games -- Country-Specific Assessment, July 2016. This risk assessment reflects an unlikely scenario, given that it will be winter in Rio de Janeiro during the Games and mosquito-borne transmission of Zika virus is predicted to be low. 19 countries participating in the Games have no evidence of ongoing or previous Zika virus transmission but do have the environmental and population conditions that could support ongoing mosquito-borne Zika virus transmission after introduction from a single traveler after the Games. For 15 of the countries, travel to Rio de Janeiro during the Games is not estimated to increase substantially the level of risk above that incurred by the usual aviation travel baseline for these countries. Chad, Djibouti, Eritrea, and Yemen have an additional, unique factor: apart from projected travel to the Games, these countries do not have substantial travel to any country with local Zika virus transmission. With the exception of these 4 countries, the Games do not pose a unique or substantive risk for mosquito-borne transmission of Zika virus in excess of that posed by non-Games travel.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There has been considerable speculation about the Olympic Games as a source of dissemination of Zika virus around the world. The above assessment suggests that spread from the Games is unlikely to pose an additional problem over and above that from normal travel unrelated to the Games. - Mod.TY]
