KOB [edited]<http://www.kob.com/new-mexico-news/state-health-department-rio-arriba-woman-diagnosed-with-wound-botulism/4199079/>State Health Department: Rio Arriba woman diagnosed with wound botulism-----------------------------------------------------------------------A 33-year-old woman in Rio Arriba County [New Mexico] has contracted wound botulism, the New Mexico Department of Health reported Wednesday afternoon [13 Jul 2016]. The Health Department opened an investigation into the case. In a statement, the department said the woman is a heroin user and they believe the infection source to be a soiled skin injection site, a contaminated needle or contaminated heroin. The woman is hospitalized, the statement said.""We are asking healthcare providers to carefully consider wound botulism in patients who are showing symptoms, especially if they have a history of injection drug use,"" Health Secretary Lynn Gallagher said in the statement. ""People who inject drugs should be aware of the signs and symptoms associated with wound botulism and seek immediate medical attention if they begin to exhibit any symptoms.""Botulism is rare but potentially life-threatening, the statement said. Symptoms include blurred or double vision, dropping eyelids, slurred speech, difficulty swallowing, dry mouth, muscle weakness or paralysis, and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. It could lead to paralysis in the respiratory muscles, arms, legs and eventual death.[Byline: J.R. Oppenheim]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The following is a discussion regarding black tar heroin, which, because of being injected intramuscularly, can subject the injected drug user to a number of infections, including botulism, tetanus, and necrotizing fasciitis (<http://www.drugaddictiontreatment.com/types-of-addiction/heroin-types-of-addiction/comparing-heroin-and-black-tar/>):""Black tar heroin is a type of illegal narcotic derived from morphine. Commonly called black tar heroin, heroin content is not actually what distinguishes this particular drug from other kinds of opiates. While black tar does contain an amount of heroin that can range from 29 to 80 percent, the drug is actually identified by the amount of comparatively crude derivatives of morphine that result from incomplete acetylation. Without delving into the chemistry too exhaustively, black tar is an unrefined product that is made without the complex equipment and chemicals necessary to produce heroin with a high level of purity. Black tar is manufactured primarily in Mexico, and is also commonly referred to as black, brown, manteca, night, or dark. It is also produced in smaller quantities in other parts of Latin America.""Black tar use has spread throughout North America and can also be found in parts of Europe. Since the drug does not require the advanced equipment necessary to make pure heroin in white powder form, it is relatively cheap to manufacture and therefore cheap to purchase. It is less expensive to buy than white powder heroin, and it is much less expensive than commonly abused prescription opiates such as Vicodin or OxyContin.""Black tar is distinct in appearance from white powder heroin. It ranges in color from black to light brown, and it is sold either as a cola-like chunk, a coarse powder, or a sticky substance with the consistency of melted tar, hence the name. Black tar can be injected in its tar-like form, snorted in its powder form, or smoked. The effects of black tar are similar to the effects of other kinds of opiates, and include feelings of euphoria, relaxation, loss of anxiety, and anesthesia. Side effects can include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, and dry mouth.""The most common method of using black tar is injection, and this method poses risks apart from the dangers of the drug itself. For one, black tar users frequently suffer from venous sclerosis, a condition in which the veins shrink and harden. It may become impossible for users to inject intravenously if they develop venous sclerosis, forcing them to resort to subcutaneous injection. However, this method includes its own risks, such as cellulitis and necrotizing fasciitis. When black tar users inject repeatedly, they put themselves at risk for contracting wound botulism due to the impurities and adulterants present in the drug. The sticky consistency of the drug may also put users at greater risk of HIV if they are washing needles and reusing them.""The cheapness of black tar has helped to make it comparatively popular among young users who are inexperienced with drug use. Complications from drug use are more common when users are inexperienced. In addition, the impurities present in black tar, as well as the inconsistent ratio of heroin present in the drug, make overdose or death from complications due to the adulterants much more likely. Like all derivatives of morphine, black tar is extremely addictive. Dependency can occur after very few uses, and tolerance can also increase rapidly, causing users to experience irresistible cravings for increasingly large amounts of the drug."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/17672>.]
