Daily Gate City [edited]<http://www.dailygate.com/article_636948a8-4aa1-11e6-8fc6-c7cca4342258.html>Hand, foot and mouth disease [HFMD] is making some local children - many of them very young - pretty miserable. Although the Lee County Health Department [LCHD] hasn't received any official word about the outbreak, Keokuk Area Hospital representative Amy Conlee said the hospital's affiliated clinics report an upswing in patients with the virus. ""Hand, foot and mouth disease can be spread to little ones,"" LCHD Administrator Julie Schilling said. ""It spreads by cough, sneeze or by contact with stool. It's typical in child care facilities.""Daycare operations and preschools can be ripe ground for communicable diseases that travel by close personal contact, proximity to dirty diapers and shared saliva or mucus on toys and other surfaces. Adults can spread the virus to children without having symptoms themselves. ""It can be spread pretty easily,"" Schilling said.Symptoms are a general feeling of being unwell, a fever, painful sores in the throat and mouth, and rash and blisters on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, according to Schilling. Mouth and throat sores can affect a baby or child's appetite, so intake of fluid and food should be encouraged.""There's no specific treatment,"" Schilling said. ""Take comfort measures and watch them. If they don't eat or drink for a time, call a health care provider."" Comfort measures can include mouthwashes or sprays that numb mouth pain and over-the-counter medications other than aspirin to relieve pain and fever. Aspirin should not be given to children.Vaccinations have not been developed for HFMD, and there is no treatment.Prevention tips---------------The Centers for Disease Control give tips for lessening the risks of sharing or contracting HFMD:- Keep children home from school or daycare if they have symptoms.- Wash hands often with soap and water, especially after changing diapers and using the toilet.- Clean and disinfect commonly touched surfaces and soiled items, including toys.- Avoid close contact such as kissing, hugging, or sharing eating utensils or cups with people with hand, foot and mouth disease.- If a person has mouth sores, it might be painful to swallow. However, it is important for people with hand, foot and mouth disease to drink enough liquids to prevent dehydration (loss of body fluids). If a person cannot swallow enough liquids, they may need to receive them through an IV in their vein.[Byline: Cindy Lutzi]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Keokuk is a city and a county seat of Lee County, Iowa, United States. It is also the most southerly city in Iowa.The causative agent for hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD) is an enterovirus. It is not the same as other diseases that have similar names: foot-and-mouth disease (sometimes called hoof-and-mouth disease). See previous ProMED post Hand, foot & mouth disease - USA (04): (CA) 20160505.4204778 for further discussion of HFMD. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/46889>.]
