KJZZ [edited]<http://kjzz.org/content/335511/can-person-refuse-be-tested-or-vaccinated-against-measles>For the past several weeks, nearly 2 dozen cases of measles have been identified. The cases stemmed from US Immigration and Customs Enforcement employees who refused to be vaccinated or show proof of vaccination.As KJZZ first reported earlier this month [July 2016], health officials believed an 8-month-old child was exposed to the virus and the family refused testing. So what happens when a person doesn't want to be tested for a contagious and potentially deadly disease? It depends.""So there's certain diseases like smallpox where we can actually require vaccination because it can be so contagious and so lethal,"" said Jessica Rigler with the Arizona Department of Health. ""A lot of the authorities that we have, though, allow public health to exclude people, isolate them, or quarantine them.""She said measles is one disease where DHS is limited in its authority. While it can quarantine a person, it can't make them get tested or vaccinated.[Byline: Kathy Ritchie]--Communicated byProMED-mailpromed@promedmail.org[There has been a resurgence of measles in recent years as parents have chosen not to vaccinate their children and/or immunity has waned with age. From 2014-2015, a measles outbreak began at Disneyland, California (USA) and proceeded to infect 141 people from 6 states, Mexico, and Canada, including 131 in California alone, largely because of low vaccination coverage.Vaccination-----------Before vaccines were available, the disease struck 3 million to 4 million Americans a year, hospitalizing 48 000 and killing 500. Vaccination of the population protects those individuals who received the vaccine as well as those who are unable to be vaccinated because of compromised health conditions, such as those with immunocompromised immune systems, as well as babies who have not yet been vaccinated. To protect such individuals, the population needs to achieve at least 92 per cent immunity to prevent outbreaks (according to Robert Glatter, an emergency physician at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City). To this end, at least 2 states in the US, California and Vermont, repealed exemptions that allowed unvaccinated children to attend school because of their parents' personal beliefs.Measles is highly contagious and spreads easily from person to person. If it is correct that employees of US Immigration and Customs Enforcement actually are spreading measles to others, that is a serious problem and is contrary to the concept of public health. Vaccination should be mandatory for officials working in a role where they interact with the public. If this is a case of waning antibody, then booster doses should be administered.Quarantine and Isolation (excerpted from <http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/state-quarantine-and-isolation-statutes.aspx>)----------------------------------------------------------------------Public health quarantine and isolation are legal authorities that may be, but rarely are, implemented to prevent the spread of communicable diseases. Isolation may be used for ill people, to protect the public by preventing exposure to infected people. Quarantine may be used to restrict the movement of well people who may have been exposed to a communicable disease until it can be determined if they are ill, for example, people who have a communicable disease but do not know it, or may have the disease because of close contact with ill people but do not show symptoms.State and local governments are primarily responsible for maintaining public health and controlling the spread of diseases within state borders. Among other state public health emergency preparedness powers, every state, the District of Columbia and most territories have laws authorizing quarantine and isolation, usually through the state's health authority. The federal government has authority as well, through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), to monitor and respond to the spread of communicable diseases across national or state borders, or if the state government is unwilling or unable to effectively respond.CDC's authority to exercise quarantine and isolation powers for specific diseases derives from the federal Public Health Service Act and a series of presidential Executive Orders most recently updated in 2014. Under these orders, federal quarantine and isolation powers currently apply to the following diseases: cholera; diphtheria; infectious tuberculosis; plague; smallpox; yellow fever; viral hemorrhagic fevers (Lassa, Marburg, Ebola, Crimean-Congo, South American, and others not yet isolated or named); influenza caused by new or re emergent flu viruses that are causing, or have the potential to cause, a pandemic; and severe acute respiratory syndromes. [Note that measles is not included even though it can be a serious disease. Quarantine and isolation are defined as:Quarantine: compulsory separation, including restriction of movement, of people who have potentially been exposed to a contagious disease, until it can be determined whether they have become sick or no longer pose a risk to others, for example, based on time elapsed from their potential exposure.Isolation: separation of people known or suspected (via signs, symptoms, or laboratory criteria) to be infected with a contagious disease from those who are not sick to prevent them from transmitting disease to others.Use of quarantine or isolation powers may create sensitive issues related to civil liberties. Individuals have rights to due process of law, and generally, isolation or quarantine must be carried out in the least restrictive setting necessary to maintain public health. According to a survey conducted for the Trust for America's Health in 2007, ""nearly 9 out of 10 Americans say they would abide by a voluntary quarantine and stay home in the case of an outbreak of a pandemic flu. Willingness to accept this type of quarantine exists across the public at high levels. Among the 10 percent who say they would not adhere to the government's request of a voluntary quarantine, most indicate that they could not stay at home due to fears of losing needed income (64 percent) or losing their jobs altogether (39 percent).""A table is included that] summarizes state law authority for quarantine and isolation within state borders, including authority to initiate quarantine and isolation, limitations on state quarantine powers, and penalties for violations. ...-- moreA map of the United States can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>. - Mod.LK]******[2] UK: (South Devon) outbreakDate: Thu 14 Jul 2016Source: The Herald [edited]<http://www.plymouthherald.co.uk/devon-measles-outbreak-escalates/story-29512374-detail/story.html>A measles outbreak at a school in South Devon has escalated with 15 students diagnosed with the highly infectious illness and another 11 probable cases.Public health chiefs in the region are urging parents at King Edward VI Community College (KEVICC) in Totnes to ensure their child has the MMR vaccination, which provides immunisation against measles, mumps, and rubella.Family doctors in the town have blamed the outbreak on a significant number of parents who refused to the MMR jab for their child in the light of now discredited claims that it was linked to autism.Alan Salt, Principal at KEVICC in Totnes, said parents must get their child immunised for the sake of the whole community. ""The number of unvaccinated children in our community carries risks to all young people, especially those who are unable to be immunised, such as infants under 12 months of age and those with suppressed immunity.""With this in mind, the college urges parents and carers to make sure they follow Public Health England and GP advice and ensure their children are vaccinated.""Dr Dylan Watkins, GP principal at Totnes' Leatside Surgery in Totnes said it wasn't too late and urged parents to act.""The latest measles outbreak spreading through the youth of Totnes is solely because of the number of unvaccinated children in the area. It is not too late to get vaccinated though -- if your child is unvaccinated and you'd like them to be more protected then contact your GP surgery and they will do their best to help.""Measles is a highly infectious disease which can affect anyone, but is most common in children under the age of 7.The outbreak surrounds King Edward VI Community College (KEVICC) in Totnes.In most cases it is unpleasant, but will clear in around a week. However it can lead to serious and sometimes fatal complications.In mid-June [2016], Public Health England (PHE) issued a warning to parents after one case of measles, which is a notifiable disease, was confirmed. Earlier this week, PHE said there aware 13 confirmed cases at KEVICC with another 10 probably. This morning [14 Jul 2016], the organisation upped that again saying 15 cases were now confirmed and 11 were thought likely to be so.Letters advising parents to ensure their children are fully protected against measles by having had 2 doses of the MMR vaccine have been issued to parents at the school and other schools in the area.Students suspected to have measles should not return to school until 5 days after the telltale rash appears.Two doses of the MMR vaccine offer high protection against measles provided the 1st dose is given after 12 months of age.Dr Sarah Harrison, consultant in Health Protection for Public Health England in the South West, said communities like schools were particularly at risk of immunisation levels were low. ""Measles is a very infectious disease, and can spread rapidly among communities such as schools if people have not been fully immunised,"" she said.--- more[Byline: Lyn Barton]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[A map of the United Kingdom can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/45973>. - Mod.LK]******[3] UK: outbreak warningDate: Sun 17 Jul 2016Source: Sommerset Live, Shepton Mallet Journal [edited]<http://www.somersetlive.co.uk/measles-warning-after-south-west-outbreak/story-29521970-detail/story.html>With hot weather on the way and more young people getting together at festivals, fairs, outdoor parties, or on holiday breaks, a warning has been issued to young adults to make sure they are protected against measles.An outbreak of measles in the West Country has added to concerns. Public Health England (PHE) is advising young adults to ensure they have received 2 doses of MMR vaccine.Measles can be more severe in teenagers and adults and some may need hospital treatment. Measles is also extremely infectious and summer events like music festivals and fairs where people are mixing closely with each other provide the ideal place for the infection to spread.The vaccine also protects against other serious illnesses including mumps. Anyone who is unsure of their vaccination status should contact their GP practice to make an appointment.The warning comes following an outbreak of measles in Devon.Measles is a highly infectious viral illness that can be very unpleasant and sometimes lead to serious complications. It's estimated around 1 in every 5000 people with measles will die as a result of the infection.It's now uncommon in the UK because of the effectiveness of vaccination.There is an outbreak of measles currently in South Devon and Public Health England is encouraging individuals and families who may not have been vaccinated to consider it in order to protect themselves and others.Anyone can get measles if they haven't been vaccinated or they haven't had it before, although it's most common in young children.The infection usually clears in around 7 to 10 days.Who's most at risk?-------------------Complications of measles are more likely to develop in certain groups of people, including: babies younger than one year old, children with a poor diet, children with a weakened immune system, such as those with leukaemia, teenagers, and adults who may not have had the MMR vaccination as it was only introduced in 1998.Symptoms of measles-------------------The initial symptoms of measles develop around 10 days after you're infected. These can include: cold-like symptoms such as a runny nose, sneezing, and a cough, sore, red eyes that may be sensitive to light, a high temperature (fever), which may reach around 40 deg C (104 deg F), small greyish-white spots on the inside of the cheeks.A few days later, a red-brown blotchy rash will appear. This usually starts on the head or upper neck, before spreading outwards to the rest of the body.When to see your GP-------------------You should contact your GP as soon as possible if you suspect that you or your child may have measles. It's best to phone before your visit as your GP surgery may need to make arrangements to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others. You should also see your GP if you've been in close contact with someone who has measles and you've not been fully vaccinated (had 2 doses of the MMR vaccine) or haven't had the infection before -- even if you don't have any symptoms.Is measles serious?-------------------Measles can be unpleasant, but will usually pass in about 7-10 days without causing any further problems. Once you've had measles, your body builds up resistance (immunity) to the virus and it's highly unlikely you'll get it again. However, measles can lead to serious and potentially life-threatening complications in some people. These include infections of the lungs (pneumonia) and brain (encephalitis).How measles is spread---------------------The measles virus is contained in the millions of tiny droplets that come out of the nose and mouth when an infected person coughs or sneezes. You can easily catch measles by breathing in these droplets or, if the droplets have settled on a surface, by touching the surface and then placing your hands near your nose or mouth. The virus can survive on surfaces for a few hours. People with measles are infectious from when the symptoms develop until about 4 days after the rash first appears.How measles can be prevented----------------------------Measles can be prevented by having the measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine. This is given in 2 doses as part of the NHS [National Health Service] childhood vaccination programme. The 1st dose is given when your child is around 13 months old and a 2nd dose is given before your child starts school. Adults and older children can be vaccinated at any age if they haven't been fully vaccinated before. Ask your GP about having the vaccination. If the MMR vaccine isn't suitable for you, a treatment called human normal immunoglobulin (HNIG) can be used if you're at immediate risk of catching measles.Treating measles----------------There are several things you can do to help relieve your symptoms and reduce the risk of spreading the infection, including: taking paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve fever, aches, and pains -- aspirin should not be given to children under 16 years old; drinking plenty of water to avoid dehydration; closing the curtains to help reduce light sensitivity; using damp cotton wool to clean the eyes, staying off school or work for at least 4 days from when the rash first appears. In severe cases, especially if there are complications, you or your child may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment.How common is measles?----------------------The effectiveness of the MMR vaccine means that cases of measles are uncommon in the UK nowadays. However, the number of cases has risen in recent years and there have been some high-profile outbreaks. It's thought the rise in the number of cases of measles is the result of parents not getting their child vaccinated with the MMR vaccine, probably because of speculation linking MMR to autism. Publicity in 1998 highlighted a report claiming there was a link between the MMR jab and autism. However, numerous studies undertaken to investigate this claim found no link between the MMR vaccine and autism.[Byline: Oliver Hulme]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This article reports the warning issued after the case increase described in item [2] above. It includes a thorough discussion of measles. - Mod.LK]
