The Washington Post [edited]<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-health/wp/2016/07/19/norovirus-strikes-the-republican-national-convention/>A terrifying word circulated Tue, 19 Jul 2016, at the Republican National Convention: norovirus. A dozen staffers in the California delegation who had arrived in Cleveland early have fallen ill with the contagious virus, California GOP chairman Jim Brulte said. The virus causes vomiting and diarrhea and has been known to spread explosively through people in closed places, such as cruise ships, schools and nursing homes, according to the CDC. Brulte said that, so far, no delegates or alternates have shown symptoms. He said his delegation will continue to attend the convention at Quicken Loans Arena, where the Californians sit next to the Maryland delegation.The delegates from California are staying at the Kalahari Resort in Sandusky, Ohio, nearly 60 miles away from Cleveland. Brulte said the delegates and their guests were spending the day Tue, 19 Jul 2016, at the Cedar Point amusement park in Sandusky or at the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio -- or just relaxing at the Kalahari Resort. He said he believes 1 staffer brought the virus to Ohio from California and then passed it to the staffer's spouse. Soon, 12 of the 36 staffers were sick.The infected individuals 1st began showing symptoms on Thu, 14 Jul 2016, and Erie County health officials have taken fecal samples for analysis, the Plain Dealer reported. State party officials alerted the delegation Mon [18 Jul 2016] morning, to the norovirus outbreak and briefed attendees again the next day. They also informed Ohio health officials. ""We will continue to follow all county health department directives to keep the illness from spreading. We wish our staffers a speedy recovery,"" Kaitlyn MacGregor, executive director of the California GOP, said in an email to The Post.They have instructed delegates to wash their hands frequently, use sanitizers, and avoid shaking hands (something, as it happens, that Donald Trump has long been loath to do). They also should not share food and have been told to stay off delegation buses to the convention arena if they exhibit any symptoms of norovrius.The virus can be acquired through contact from infected people or surfaces, or through consuming contaminated food or water. Norovirus inflames the stomach, the intestines, or both. Symptoms include stomach pain, nausea, diarrhea and vomiting. Such symptoms can be especially dangerous for young children and older adults.Every year, about 19 to 21 million people become sick with norovirus; about 570 to 800 people die annually from it, according to the CDC.In Ohio, hand-sanitizer dispensers were spotted Mon [18 Jul 2016] night at the resort where the California delegates are staying, the Los Angeles Times reported. ""We worked with the hotel to add sanitizing stations in and around the area where our delegation activities are,"" Brulte said. The African-themed Kalahari Resort in Sandusky has 884 guest rooms, according to a company website. The property features indoor and outdoor water parks and an outdoor adventure park. A spokeswoman for Kalahari Resorts said the company is cooperating ""with all necessary officials.""The California delegation includes 172 delegates and 168 alternates, plus a number of guests, with the entire group numbering about 500, Brulte said. Of the ailing staffers, Brulte said, ""Most of them are disappointed they can't work, but they understand that they're out of circulation"" until they are symptom-free for at least 24 hours.[Byline: Joel Achenbach, Elahe Izadi, Ed O'Keefe]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It should be noted that the prototypic norovirus, Norwalk virus, was originally isolated in Norwalk, Ohio, obviously the state where the Republican National Convention is occurring and where another outbreak probably from norovirus recently occurred in Ohio. Norovirus infections and outbreaks are usually more common in cooler, winter months. About half of all cases occur from Dec through Feb in countries above the equator and Jun through Aug in countries below the equator. However, in places closer to the equator, norovirus may be less seasonal. This may be because of temperature or the timing of the rainy season, but may also be associated with the birth rate. Worldwide, norovirus is the leading cause of gastroenteritis outbreaks. New norovirus strains emerge about every 2 to 4 years. Often, but not always, these new strains lead to an increase in outbreaks worldwide.No doubt, this outbreak will be closely covered in both the Twitter-world and on facebook - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/237>.]
