KRQE News 13 [edited]<http://krqe.com/2016/07/19/health-officials-confirm-case-of-plague-in-bernalillo-county-man/>State health officials confirmed the first case of plague in 2016 in Bernalillo County on Tue [19 Jul 2016]. The State Department of Health says a 77-year-old Bernalillo County man has contracted the disease, making this the 2nd human case of plague in New Mexico in 2016. They say the other case was in a teen from Rio Arriba County who did recover. So far in 2016, there have also been 16 cases of plague in pets, according to state health officials.The Department of Health offers these tips to reduce the risk of plague:- Use insect repellent on exposed skin and clothing when you go outdoors. The CDC recommends repellents containing DEET, Picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or IR3535 for use on skin, and permethrin for use on clothing. Always follow label directions when using insect repellents.- Keep your pets from roaming and hunting.- Talk to your veterinarian about using an appropriate flea and tick control product on your pets as not all products are safe for cats, dogs, or your children.- Clean up areas near the house where rodents could live, such as woodpiles, brush piles, junk and abandoned vehicles.- Don't allow children or others to handle sick or dead wildlife.- Sick pets should be examined promptly by a veterinarian.- See your doctor about any unexplained illness involving a sudden and severe fever.- Put hay, wood, and compost piles as far as possible from your home.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The manifestations of the infection in this man are not stated but are likely due to bubonic plague.As outlined by the CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and quoted in ProMED-mail post 20120601.1153277:""The typical sign of the most common form of human plague is a swollen and very tender lymph gland, accompanied by pain. The swollen gland is called a 'bubo.' Bubonic plague should be suspected when a person develops a swollen gland, fever, chills, headache, and extreme exhaustion, and has a history of possible exposure to infected rodents, rabbits, or fleas. A person usually becomes ill with bubonic plague 2 to 6 days after being infected.""When bubonic plague is left untreated, plague bacteria invade the bloodstream. As the plague bacteria multiply in the bloodstream, they spread rapidly throughout the body and cause a severe and often fatal condition. Infection of the lungs with the plague bacterium causes the pneumonic form of plague, a severe respiratory illness. The infected person may experience high fever, chills, cough, and breathing difficulty and may expel bloody sputum. If plague patients are not given specific antibiotic therapy, the disease can progress rapidly to death. About 14 percent (1 in 7) of all plague cases in the United States are fatal."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/233>.]
