KHON2 [edited]<http://khon2.com/2016/07/20/oahu-hepatitis-a-outbreak-up-to-74/>According to the state Department of Health, there are 74 confirmed cases of hepatitis A in the current outbreak. Since the last update on 12 Jul 2016, HDOH has identified 22 new cases of hepatitis A, 26 of which have required hospitalization. The onset of illness for the cases has ranged between 12 Jun 2016 and 14 Jul 2016. All of the cases are residents of Oahu with the exception of 2 individuals who now live on Hawaii Island and Maui, but were on Oahu during their exposure period. State epidemiologist Dr. Sarah Park says those 2 patients were infected while they were still living on Oahu and moved when they had already gone past the infectious period. ""They are no risk for further transmission on the neighbor islands, our investigators have already confirmed,"" Park said.Unfortunately, health officials aren't much closer to finding the cause of the outbreak. Park says there has been no solid link to tie the cases together. ""It is like pulling teeth trying to figure it out together,"" Park said.Officials say identifying the source of infection is a challenge due to the long incubation period of the disease -- anywhere from 15 to 52 days. This makes it difficult for patients to accurately recall the foods consumed and locations visited during the period when infection could have taken place. While health officials still don't know what's causing the outbreak, they say they're certain it's one particular food or drink item that's responsible for all 74 cases. If the outbreak continues to grow, then they can at least narrow the suspected cause as something that is not a fresh product. ""The longer we see cases drawn out, the more and more we believe that maybe this is a frozen or a dry product something that has a longer shelf life,"" Park said.The site also identifies 2 restaurants where employees tested positive for the virus: Baskin-Robbins in Waikele and Taco Bell in Waipio. Officials stress that these restaurants have not been identified as the source of the outbreak, but customers who dined there during specific time periods are encouraged to seek vaccination.The health department says that if you are unvaccinated and are exposed to the disease, you should talk to your healthcare provider about the possibility of receiving hepatitis A vaccine or immune globulin. Doing so may provide some protection against the disease if administered within the 1st 2 weeks after exposure.The good news is that pharmacies and hospitals are stocking up on the vaccine. Longs Drugs and Walgreens both say they have ample supply and continue to ship the vaccine here as needed.Health officials recommend that you:- Get vaccinated.- Frequent hand washing with soap and warm water after using the bathroom or changing a diaper.- Washing hands before preparing food.- Appropriately cooking and preparing foods.[Byline: Manolo Morales]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>*****[2]Date: Mon 18 Jul 2016Source: Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/oahu-man-may-require-liver-transplant-after-contracting-hepatitis-a-14453/>A Oahu man in his 30's who contracted hepatitis A may need a liver transplant, according to a Honolulu news source. A hepatitis A outbreak that began in June 2016 on the Hawaiian Island has seen at least 52 [now 74] illnesses to date.According to KHON 2 report last week, the patient has been transferred to Queen's Medical Center in case a transplant is required. Doctors believe he may have an underlying medical condition that made the hepatitis A case this severe.Hepatitis A is a contagious liver disease that results from infection with the hepatitis A virus (HAV). It can range in severity from a mild illness lasting a few weeks to a severe illness lasting several months. Hepatitis A is usually spread when a person ingests fecal matter -- even in microscopic amounts -- from contact with objects, food, or drinks contaminated by the feces, or stool, of an infected person.Almost all people who get Hepatitis A recover completely and do not have any lasting liver damage, although they may feel sick for months. Hepatitis A can sometimes cause liver failure and death, although this is rare and occurs more commonly in persons 50 years of age or older and persons with other liver diseases, such as hepatitis B or C.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[With 74 diagnosed cases, there are certainly likely to be many more infections which are anicteric (not jaundiced) or totally asymptomatic. Of the 74 cases, 1 patient apparently developed a severe disease, likely what is called acute fulminant hepatitis. Not specific for type A hepatitis, it certainly occurs with hepatitis B and E as well as hepatitis B superinfected with type D (a defective virus that requires HBV to replicate). The risk of acute fulminant hepatitis, at least with types A and B is generally thought to be 1 in 1000. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/214>.]
