Daily Mail Australia [edited]<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3698502/Gastr.html>There have been more outbreaks of gastroenteritis in NSW this winter than cases of influenza and it is affecting children and young adults in huge volumes. In the last week 1612 people have gone to their hospital emergency department with gastroenteritis symptoms bringing the fortnight total to 3353, a NSW spokesperson told Daily Mail Australia. In total 798 people were admitted to hospital because their symptoms were so significant.Hospitals in Western Sydney are recording the largest numbers of outbreaks - prompting health professionals to plead with the public to wash their hands to prevent it spreading more. In just 2 weeks there have been 33 gastroenteritis outbreaks at childcare centers, aged care facilities and hospitals - 341 people were affected. Only 4 of those outbreaks were shown to be caused by the infamous norovirus, according to NSW Health.NSW Chief Health Officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said viral gastroenteritis is highly infectious and often spread via direct contact with an infected person. ""These outbreaks are mostly caused by infection with a virus - most often norovirus or rotavirus-- and spread easily from person to person, particularly if hands are not carefully washed after using the toilet or attending to nappy changes,"" Dr Chant said. These symptoms can take between 1 and 3 days to develop and usually last between 1 and 2 days, sometimes longer.""The best way to reduce your chances of getting viral gastroenteritis is to wash your hands thoroughly with soap and running water for at least 10 seconds, particularly after using the toilet, assisting someone with diarrhea or vomiting, attending diaper changes and before preparing and eating food. Dehydration often follows bouts of vomiting and diarrhea, particularly in young children, so people with the virus should rest well and increase the amount of fluids they drink. If people are concerned they should see their local GP,"" Dr Chant said.Children under 5 and young adults between 17-34 have been worst affected by the unseasonal outbreak.[Byline: Belinda Cleary]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is not clear from the posting if other viral diagnoses have been made separate for the few shown to be norovirus in origin. It is possible that norovirus has caused many more of these clusters since specific tests may not have been done. Besides norovirus, other viral causes of gastroenteritis include rotavirus, astrovirus, enteric adenovirus, and calcivirus. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/284>.]
