Yahoo News, AP (Associated Press) report [edited]<https://www.yahoo.com/news/water-contaminated-pot-chemicals-small-colorado-town-215339474.html>Colorado town's water may be tainted with marijuana chemical------------------------------------------------------------Officials told residents of a small Colorado community not to drink or shower in tap water Thursday [21 Jul 2016] because one of the town's wells may have been contaminated with THC, marijuana's intoxicating chemical. [Other articles indicate the news release including not letting pets drink the potentially contaminated water. - Mod.TG]No illnesses have been linked to the water in Hugo, a town of about 730 people some 100 miles southeast of Denver, said Lincoln County Public Health Director Susan Kelly.THC was detected in tests conducted with field kits, although other field tests were negative, sheriff's Capt. Michael Yowell said.More definitive laboratory tests were underway, he said.The field tests weren't capable of showing how much THC was in the water, but only whether the chemical was there, he said.Investigators found signs that one of Hugo's 5 wells had been tampered with, but they hadn't determined whether someone deliberately tainted the water, Yowell said.The FBI and the Colorado Bureau of Investigation are helping with the case, he said.Hugo prohibits marijuana cultivation, product manufacturing, testing facilities and retail marijuana stores, although those activities are legal elsewhere in the state.Peter Perrone, owner of a marijuana testing facility in the Denver area, expressed doubt that THC could be in the water. The chemical isn't water-soluble, he told The Denver Post (<http://tinyurl.com/h8s9z5u>).Yowell said investigators were aware of that but had to follow up because of the field test results.He said a company that administers employee drug tests was the 1st to detect THC in Hugo's water. A tester sampled tap water, assuming it would be negative, but it was positive.It's unlikely that consuming pot-tainted water would cause lasting health effects, said Mark Salley, a spokesman for the state Department of Public Health and Environment.The effects of drinking THC-laced water would depend on the concentration, the amount consumed and how quickly it was consumed, and officials don't yet have that information, Salley said.Consuming water containing THC would be similar to eating marijuana-infused food, meaning the effect would depend entirely on how much was consumed and the strength of the tainted water.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is the main psychoactive constituent of _Cannabis sativa_ L. and its therapeutic effects are currently under intensive study. However, THC has a very low aqueous solubility (1-2 microg/mL), which restricts its use as a pharmaceutical.However, if THC were considered for pharmaceutical use, THC forms a drug-cyclodextrin complex in an aqueous solution of hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin (HP-beta-CD), resulting in a thousand-fold increase in THC solubility. This improvement in solubility can be further increased by adding 0.1 percent hydroxypropylmethylcellulose to the HP-beta-CD solution. The present results suggest that the use of cyclodextrins might be a simple and useful method to overcome the poor water solubility of THC [Life Sci. 1998;63(26):PL381-4].The outcome of this investigation will be interesting to watch. Either it has leached through an underground source or someone has deliberately added a compound to the water.We will be interested in what the lab test and further investigation reveals. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/209>.]
