Fay Observer [edited]<http://www.fayobserver.com/news/local/bladen-county-officials-testing-white-lake-for-ties-to-skin/article_df420466-4ed2-5513-a6f4-aedee1fd389e.html>Health and environmental officials are investigating whether a skin rash outbreak in Bladen County [North Carolina] could be linked to one of its popular tourist attractions, White Lake.The rash affected 15 to 20 people -- from toddlers to adults -- who visited the lake during the week of 4 Jul 2016.White Lake is roughly 8 miles [about 13 km] east of Elizabethtown. Homes and a nearby golf course surround the lake that attracts thousands of visitors each year.""We haven't confirmed if the skin rashes are connected to the water, but we are looking into it,"" said David Howard, director of the county's Health and Human Services Agency.The rashes were found in multiple areas such as the face, neck, chest, torso, and legs, Howard said.""At the health department, we are concerned about public health and anything communicable,"" he said. ""We haven't had any reports of serious issues, such as gastrointestinal, that's been attributed to the lake for sure.""Parents and those affected likened the rash's appearance to chickenpox, said Kory Hair, an environmental health specialist for Bladen County.Howard said the rash cleared a few days after being treated with a skin cream such as cortisone or medicine prescribed by a family doctor.""One parent I spoke to did have a dermatologist do a skin culture on the child, and they didn't find any abnormal bacterial growth,"" Howard said.The rash outbreak comes more than a month after health officials blamed the brain-eating _Naegleria fowleri_ amoeba for the death of an 18-year-old of Westerville, Ohio. Officials believe she contracted the amoeba, which can be deadly when it enters the body through the nose, after falling out of a raft at the US National Whitewater Center in Charlotte [North Carolina].Since the skin rash outbreak in Bladen County, officials collected 2 water samples from White Lake -- both in 100 milliliter tubes -- for the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services' State Laboratory of Public Health to analyze.The lab will test the water for 2 types of bacteria: enterococcus and pseudomonas, which are known to cause rashes, Hair said.Howard said officials also will check for the parasite that causes ""swimmer's itch,"" also known as cercarial dermatitis, common in fresh and salt waters that infects birds and mammals.Test results could return as early as today [22 Jul 2016] or [Mon 25 Jul 2016], Hair said.Howard said the skin rash outbreak is a first this year [2016] possibly tied to White Lake. He became the county's health director in May.""These things can crop up during the summer time with hot water, weather, and heavy use of the lake,"" he said. ""It provides an opportunity for these things to happen, especially with swimmer's itch.""In June 2009, Cumberland County [North Carolina] health officials confirmed a 14-year-old boy was hospitalized with a rare infection after swimming in Hope Mills Lake. Doctors linked the infection to _Chromobacterium violaceum_ where, at the time, fewer than 150 cases had been reported worldwide since 1927, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.The Jack Britt [High School, North Carolina] student swam at the lake with friends and was the only one infected. His family learned his condition worsened because of an already present immune system deficiency in his body, chronic granulomatous disease, which was diagnosed after the bacteria was found, The Fayetteville Observer reported in November 2010. The incident caused a drop in lake attendance soon after.Howard said a few factors can contribute to bacterial infections tied to water.""Sometimes, this can come down to how much exposure you have, such as being in the water for an extended period of time and not showering immediately after,"" he said. ""If you have sensitive skin, it's best to shower immediately after to try and get rid of anything on the skin that can cause irritation. It's about length of exposure to anything whether airborne or a parasite in the water. The longer you're there, the more chances of exposure you have.""As Bladen County officials await the test results, Howard said his staff will continue to monitor the lake, weather, and influx of visitors throughout the remainder of the season.""This is something we're trying to help with and figure out if there is something going on in the water,"" Hair said. ""It affects the citizens and visitors. We want to keep them safe.""[Byline: Alicia Banks]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It will be interesting to see if this is 'swimmer's itch' or caused by some other organism. What is unknown here is why some individuals are affected and not others. We do not know if affected swimmers were in the water longer or at different times than those not affected. Further, we do not know if this condition occurred at all locations on the lake or only at one location of the lake.We look forward to the results of the testing. - Mod.TGThe state of North Carolina can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12564>. Bladen County in southeastern North Carolina can be seen on the map at <http://geology.com/county-map/north-carolina-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
