WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/20-july-2016-ehec-uk/en/>Enterohemorrhagic _Escherichia coli_ -- United Kingdom------------------------------------------------------On 1 Jul 2016, the National IHR Focal Point for the United Kingdom notified WHO of an outbreak of enterohemorrhagic Shiga toxin-producing _Escherichia coli_ (EHEC) O157 PT34 in England and Wales. The increase in the notifications of _E. coli_ O157 cases was first observed by the South West Public Health England (PHE) Centre on 21 Jun 2016. An outbreak control team was convened on 22 Jun 2016 to investigate this increase and, on 24 Jun 2016, the 1st samples associated with this increase were confirmed as EHEC serogroup O157 phage type 34, positive for the eae (intimin) and verocytotoxin 2 genes but negative for the verocytotoxin 1 gene (hereafter referred to as 'the outbreak strain').On 27 Jun 2016, a significant increase in the number of cases with the outbreak strain was observed nationally, and the incident was declared and managed as a national outbreak. Analysis of whole genome sequencing data confirmed that the isolates fall within the same cluster. The outbreak strain is not related to strains currently circulating amongst the UK bovine reservoir but rather closely related to sequences identified in people reporting recent travel to the Mediterranean region. This suggests that the outbreak strain is likely to be imported.As of 14 Jul 2016, 158 cases had been identified, of which 105 had been classified as confirmed cases and 53 as probable. 4 of these patients remain in hospital. Features of hemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS) have been reported in 7 cases. 2 cases have died, both of whom have _E. coli_ infection listed as a causative factor.Cases are distributed throughout the UK, with the majority (91 percent) residing in England. The outbreak is characterized by multiple small clusters linked to catering and residential care premises. The proportion of hospitalized cases is high (40 percent). Cases are predominantly female (75 percent) and over the age of 18 (91 percent) -- the age range is between 1 and 98 years. Onset dates for cases range from 31 May 2016 to 5 Jul 2016.Multiple analytical studies have provided evidence that consumption of mixed salad leaves, particularly from catering establishments such as cafes and restaurants, is associated with the infection. Sampling and microbiological examination of salad products is continuing although all results to date have been negative for EHEC O157.Public health response----------------------Control measures have been implemented by a small number of wholesalers to cease adding some imported leaves to their mixed salad products pending further investigations.PHE is working with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), the Food Standards Agency and the European Commission to identify the source of the outbreak. PHE is also providing advice to the public and keeping them informed about the ongoing investigations.WHO risk assessment-------------------------------The outbreak was confirmed to have been caused by a particular strain of Shiga-toxin producing _E. coli_ (EHEC) O157 phage type 34, although the source of the infection is yet to be identified. Even though phage type 34 is the 7th most common phage type amongst EHEC O157 isolates, with 734 cases detected between 1994 and 2016, on average not more than one case is reported per week, rising to 2.35 cases per week during spring and summer; therefore, the observed increase is significant. Similar increases have not been reported from other European countries and the same strain has not been reported outside of the United Kingdom indicating that, at present, the outbreak could be restricted to the UK. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conduct risk assessment based on the latest available information.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Although washing produce that is to be consumed without cooking, such as salad components, is advisable, it is not necessarily the case that contaminating human enteric pathogens are all removed. As demonstrated in this publication, _E. coli_ O157 can be internalized into the plant per se. How often this occurs in natural settings is unclear.Erickson MC, Webb CC, Diaz-Perez JC, et al: Surface and internalized _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 on field-grown spinach and lettuce treated with spray-contaminated irrigation water. J Food Prot. 2010; 73(6): 1023-9.Abstract--------Numerous field studies have revealed that irrigation water can contaminate the surface of plants; however, the occurrence of pathogen internalization is unclear. This study was conducted to determine the sites of _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 contamination and its survival when the bacteria were applied through spray irrigation water to either field-grown spinach or lettuce. To differentiate internalized and surface populations, leaves were treated with a surface disinfectant wash before the tissue was ground for analysis of _E. coli_ O157:H7 by direct plate count or enrichment culture. Irrigation water containing _E. coli_ O157:H7 at 10^2, 10^4, or 10^6 CFU/ml was applied to spinach 48 and 69 days after transplantation of seedlings into fields. _E. coli_ O157:H7 was initially detected after application on the surface of plants dosed at 10^4 CFU/ml (4 of 20 samples) and both on the surface (17 of 20 samples) and internally (5 of 20 samples) of plants dosed at 10^6 CFU/ml. 7 days postspraying, all spinach leaves tested negative for surface or internal contamination. In a subsequent study, irrigation water containing _E. coli_ O157:H7 at 10^8 CFU/ml was sprayed onto either the abaxial (lower) or adaxial (upper) side of leaves of field-grown lettuce under sunny or shaded conditions. _E. coli_ O157:H7 was detectable on the leaf surface 27 days postspraying, but survival was higher on leaves sprayed on the abaxial side than on leaves sprayed on the adaxial side. Internalization of _E. coli_ O157:H7 into lettuce leaves also occurred with greater persistence in leaves sprayed on the abaxial side (up to 14 days) than in leaves sprayed on the adaxial side (2 days).- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>.]
