The Times of India (TOI), Times News Network (TNN) [edited]<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/aurangabad/Rabies-patients-caught-in-vaccine-stock-muddle/articleshowprint/53349572.cms?null>Patients coming to the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) [in Aurangabad] with dog-bites are reportedly being brusquely dismissed with 'vaccine not in stock' reply. The hospital authorities said that they have been unable to procure the anti-rabies vaccine (ARV) from their sources, and since the last 2 months [June and July 2016], are telling patients to either get their own drugs or go to private hospitals.When asked, the deputy director of health services (DDHS), Aurangabad division, one of the sources of the GMCH, had a different version to the tale: the hospital has not asked for any vaccine from them.According to GMCH sources, around 20 to 30 cases of dog bite are reported daily from across the district. GMCH medical superintendent, Suhas Jewalikar said, ""The hospital is facing a shortage of ARV since past 2 months. We have already placed an order for the vaccines but the designated agency has not been able to supply them. We have also enquired about the availability of the stock with the DDHS and the civic hospital, but they too stated that they have run out of stock.""When contacted, Aurangabad circle DDHS, K T Chavan affirmed that they have a stock of around 70 000 vials. ""The GMCH authorities never approached the DDHS office. If any demand comes from them, we would definitely make some drugs available,"" he said.The ARV is a crucial drug that has to be given on the 1st, 3rd, 7th, and on the 30th day of the animal bite. While the treatment is free of cost at the GMCH, it costs Rs (INR) 350-400 (5 to 6 USD) in private hospitals.Patients have bitterly rued the GMCH refusal for treatment. ""This is a regular scene at GMCH. It is always short of drugs and the patients either have to remain without treatment or shell out from their pockets to buy the drug from a private store,"" said Manoj Dhond, a 24-year-old patient bitten by a dog on Thu 21 Jul [2016]. He is yet to get his 1st shot of the anti-rabies vaccine as he cannot afford to buy it.""For the record, a person, if bitten by a rabid animal, has to be given the 1st shot within 24 hours. The anti-rabies vaccine is administered not only in case of dog bites, but also to patients bitten by monkeys, foxes, jackals, cats and even rats and bats. If the course is not started in time, the patient often dies a very painful death,"" said a doctor from GMCH. ""The laryngeal and the respiratory tract muscles start contracting and thus the person is neither able to breathe properly, nor able to drink water,"" the doctor added.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] South Africa (Free State), human, juvenileDate: Fri 22 Jul 2016Source: You.co.za (South Africa) [edited]<http://www.you.co.za/news/six-year-old-schoolgirl-carlie-second-to-die-after-gauteng-rabies-outbreak/>Little C.du P. (6) had already learnt to drive on her father's farm outside of Clocolan. She was fluent in Sotho and loved animals and being in nature. But last Wed [13 Jul 2016] the Grade 0 learner complained of feeling nauseous and cold. By Sun [17 Jul 2016] she wasn't any better and her father Johann rushed her to hospital in Bloemfontein. But by the time they arrived, she was paralyzed. By nightfall, she was dead.Yesterday the shocking news arrived: C.du P. had died of rabies.Professor Lucille Blumberg, deputy director for the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) says C.du P. is the 2nd person this year to have died of the disease. The other case was 16-year-old school boy from the Zululand district who passed away in January this year [2016].There was an outbreak of the terrible sickness in Gauteng [the province north of Free State] after 10 animals were diagnosed with it -- 6 jackals, 3 cattle and a Great Dane dog that hadn't been vaccinated. But despite the outbreak no incidents of people contracting the disease have been reported in this time. ""There were a lot of people that were exposed to rabies but they received post exposure preventative treatment that is 100 percent effective in preventing rabies,"" says Lucille.""People must distinguish between exposure to rabies and rabies in the brain. Rabies in the brain only happens when a person is bitten by an animal that has rabies and the bite tears the skin. You don't need a big bite, it only needs to tear the skin"".But she adds that it is important to remember ""not every animal that bites you will give you rabies."" Lucille says that annually an average of 5 to 10 cases of people dying of rabies is reported.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is left to be disclosed which animal species was the rabid vector in this tragic event. Children make a significant part of rabies victims, globally.The incidence of human rabies in South Africa during the last 10 years (OIE's statistics) seems to show, in broad lines, a downward trend:2006 - 312007 - 142008 - 152009 - 152010 - 162011 - 62012 - 102013 - 72014 - 62015 - 8On 10-11 Dec 2015, experts, donors, and veterinary and public health officials gathered in Geneva to adopt a plan of action towards the global elimination of dog-mediated human rabies worldwide. The main conclusion (No 6) of the conference, which was convened by the OIE and WHO, supported by FAO and GARC, was the following:""All participants and other interested parties consider the global framework as refined and adopted at the conclusion of the Conference as the most effective means to achieve the elimination of dog mediated human rabies for participating countries by 2030"".Subscribers are encouraged to visit the presentations delivered during the meeting, including those addressing the situation in 5 regions (Europe, Americas, Middle East & M North Africa, Asia, Africa) at<http://www.oie.int/eng/RABIES2015/presentation.html>.The next World Rabies Day is due 28 Sep 2016. - Mod.AS]
