The Times of India (TOI), Times News Network (TNN) [edited]<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/pune/Monkey-fever-jab-for-high-risk-group-this-winter-to-counter-spread/articleshow/53349272.cms>Individuals falling in the high-risk category, including farmers and forest workers in Sindhudurg district [Maharashtra], will be vaccinated against Kyasanur Forest disease (KFD) or monkey fever this winter to prevent the tick-borne viral infection from spreading in other parts of the state. ""We will vaccinate high-risk group people, including farmers, forest workers and people living in villages surrounded by forest in Sindhudurg district this winter. Currently, the procurement of vaccine is on. We aim to vaccinate the high-risk group between September and October [2016],"" said state surveillance officer Pradip Awate of the state health department.The state had reported the 1st case of monkey fever in the last week of January this year [2016]. Since then, the virus has infected 125 people and killed 7, all from Dodamarg taluka [sub-division] of Sindhudurg district. Health officials have initiated a tick and fever surveillance in the region. Patients are currently being given symptomatic treatment at the state-run primary health centre and district hospital.""We have spoken to Viral Diagnostic Lab officials in Shimoga in Karnataka that produces vaccines against KFD. They will provide us the stock,"" said the officials. The vaccine schedule stipulates a 2nd dose, one month apart from the 1st dose, and a booster dose at a 6-month interval. This is then followed by a yearly dose for 5 years for better protection. The viral infection, which starts with high fever and body ache, produces a haemorrhage in the body, similar to that in dengue fever. It has a mortality rate of 5 to 10 percent.The spread of the virus beyond its identified endemic pockets in Karnataka has direct relevance to public health in India. ""It calls for a surveillance programme to monitor the disease. Strengthening of the vaccination policy is necessary,"" Devendra Mourya, director of NIV [National Institute of Virology], had said in an earlier interview.However, control of ticks in the forest is tough. ""We are educating villagers about warding off tick bites. We have told them to take a hot bath whenever they come from outside and have told them to clean their animals when they are back from grazing. Besides, we are sensitizing people to wear clothes that cover them fully,"" said Yogesh Sale, district health officer of Sindhudurg district.The Indian Council of Medical Research has sounded an alert and surveillance has been stepped up in states that share a boundary with Karnataka, including Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala.Key Facts---------- Kyasanur Forest disease virus has a wide range of tick vector species and involves several mammalian hosts.- Until 2011, KFD was seen only in southern India, but recently its presence was confirmed in the Western Ghats region, including Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Goa and Maharashtra.- This discovery has raised suspicion whether it existed earlier in these areas.- The infected nymphs of the ticks are active from January to May. Once it starts to rain, the ticks remain dormant in the forest litter. They come alive post-monsoon when the temperature starts rising. - Till now, there is no evidence of man-to-man transmission of the virus.[Byline: Umesh Isalkar]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The vaccination of the high risk personnel is a great initiative, but it needs to be coupled with evaluation of the effectiveness of Kyasanur Forest disease (KFD) vaccine in view of the frequency of outbreaks in endemic areas. Data generated from the surveillance activities and the vaccination strategy must be modified accordingly. - Mod.UBA]
