Science DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf8160 [edited]<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2016/07/13/science.aaf8160.full>Lessler J, Chaisson LH, Kucirka LM, Bi Q, Grantz K, Salje H, Carcelen AC, Ott CT, Sheffield JS, Ferguson NM, Cummings DA, Metcalf CJ, Rodriguez-Barraquer I: Assessing the global threat from Zika virus. Science. 2016; pii: aaf8160. Available at <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/early/2016/07/13/science.aaf8160.full.pdf>Abstract1st discovered in 1947, Zika virus (ZIKV) infection remained a little known tropical disease until 2015, when its apparent association with a significant increase in the incidence of microcephaly in Brazil raised alarms worldwide. There is limited information on the key factors that determine the extent of the global threat from ZIKV infection and resulting complications. Here, we review what is known about the epidemiology, natural history, and public health impact of ZIKV infection, the empirical basis for this knowledge, and the critical knowledge gaps that need to be filled.[Topics covered:]A brief history of ZIKVThe natural history and pathogenesis of ZIKV- Transmission and natural history of ZIKV- Clinical illness- ZIKV in pregnancyThe potential range and impact of ZIKV- Transmissibility and potential range of ZIKV- ZIKV's potential for endemic circulationWhy has ZIKV invaded the Americas now?Challenges and research priorities for responding to the ZIKV threat- Surveillance and clinical outcomes- Ecology and evolution- Interventions and controlConclusionThe rise of ZIKV after its long persistence as a disease of apparently little importance highlights how little we truly understand about the global spread of flaviviruses and other vector borne diseases. Over the past decades, dengue, chikungunya, West Nile virus, and now ZIKV have emerged or re-emerged throughout the globe. However, why these viruses have expanded their range, while others (e.g., yellow fever) have failed to invade areas potentially ripe for their spread remains a mystery. New analytic and molecular tools have greatly expanded our ability to forecast risk and track the spread of these viruses, but a deep understanding of what makes one virus a global threat while another is not remains elusive. While the important role of random chance and the continuing evolution of viral species may make precise forecasting of emerging pandemics impossible, we can continue to improve the speed with which we assess and respond to emerging threats.The evidence highlighted in this review is both encouraging and disheartening. On the one hand, the speed with which the global community has collected and disseminated clinical, epidemiologic and laboratory information on ZIKV after identification of the threat is impressive. But the development of therapeutics and diagnostics is hampered by our ignorance, despite knowing of ZIKV's existence for over half a century. Consequently, we have been able to do little to contain the virus's rapid spread across the Americas. New threats from infectious diseases may emerge from unexpected places, and we need strategies in place we can roll out to rapidly gain an understanding of the transmission, pathogenesis, and control of previously little known pathogens to protect global public health.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides a thoughtful review of Zika virus, its history, current status and future outlook. It has an extensive list of references and notes. ProMED-mail subscribers interested in Zika virus are encouraged to read it. - Mod.TY]******[3] CDC recommendation for Olympic GamesDate: Wed 13 Jul 2016Source: Healio [edited]<http://www.healio.com/family-medicine/infectious-diseases/news/online/%7B1faf47bd-1690-4f04-99d7-a403bad3441d%7D/cdc-issues-rio-2016-zika-recommendations-for-travelers-athletes>While stressing that the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, do not pose a new or unique risk for importation and sustained transmission of the Zika virus for most countries, the CDC has released a series of recommendations for international athletes and travelers who plan on attending.Voicing support for public health interventions that increase ""ongoing readiness and response capabilities"" to prevent Zika transmission, the CDC has issued the following recommendations for athletes, international delegations and other visitors to Rio de Janeiro:- Pregnant women should not travel to any area where Zika virus transmission is ongoing;- Travelers should take protective measures -- including the use of insect repellent with active ingredients such as DEET, wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants, staying in areas that are air conditioned and have window and door screens, and sleeping under a mosquito net -- to prevent mosquito bites while in transit and for 3 weeks after returning to their home country;- Travelers should prevent possible sexual transmission of Zika while attending the 2016 games and after returning home by correctly using condoms every time they have sex, or otherwise abstaining from sex;- Males should use condoms for at least 8 weeks after travel or, if symptomatic for Zika infection, for 6 months from the start of symptoms;- After returning from a country with Zika transmission, men with pregnant partners should use condoms, or otherwise not have sex, for the duration of the pregnancy; and- Partners planning to try to become pregnant after attending the Rio games should wait at least 8 weeks, and 6 months if the male had symptomatic Zika infection.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[These recommendations closely follow those issued by the WHO. Those attending the Olympic Games would be prudent to follow this CDC advisory. - Mod.TY]******[4] Care for pregnant women post-exposureDate: Mon 25 Jul 2016Source: CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6529e1.htm?s_cid=mm6529e1_e#suggestedcitation>Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al. Update: Interim Guidance for Health Care Providers Caring for Pregnant Women with Possible Zika Virus Exposure -- United States, July 2016. doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e1AbstractCDC has updated its interim guidance for U.S. health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure, to include the emerging data indicating that Zika virus RNA can be detected for prolonged periods in some pregnant women. To increase the proportion of pregnant women with Zika virus infection who receive a definitive diagnosis, CDC recommends expanding real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) testing. Possible exposures to Zika virus include travel to or residence in an area with active Zika virus transmission, or sex with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with active Zika virus transmission without using condoms or other barrier methods to prevent infection. Testing recommendations for pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure who report clinical illness consistent with Zika virus disease (symptomatic pregnant women) are the same, regardless of their level of exposure (i.e., women with ongoing risk for possible exposure, including residence in or frequent travel to an area with active Zika virus transmission, as well as women living in areas without Zika virus transmission who travel to an area with active Zika virus transmission, or have unprotected sex with a partner who traveled to or resides in an area with active Zika virus transmission). Symptomatic pregnant women who are evaluated less than 2 weeks after symptom onset should receive serum and urine Zika virus rRT-PCR testing. Symptomatic pregnant women who are evaluated 2-12 weeks after symptom onset should 1st receive a Zika virus immunoglobulin (IgM) antibody test; if the IgM antibody test result is positive or equivocal, serum and urine rRT-PCR testing should be performed. Testing recommendations for pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure who do not report clinical illness consistent with Zika virus disease (asymptomatic pregnant women) differ based on the circumstances of possible exposure. For asymptomatic pregnant women who live in areas without active Zika virus transmission and who are evaluated less than 2 weeks after last possible exposure, rRT-PCR testing should be performed. If the rRT-PCR result is negative, a Zika virus IgM antibody test should be performed 2-12 weeks after the exposure. Asymptomatic pregnant women who do not live in an area with active Zika virus transmission, who are 1st evaluated 2-12 weeks after their last possible exposure should 1st receive a Zika virus IgM antibody test; if the IgM antibody test result is positive or equivocal, serum and urine rRT-PCR should be performed. Asymptomatic pregnant women with ongoing risk for exposure to Zika virus should receive Zika virus IgM antibody testing as part of routine obstetric care during the 1st and 2nd trimesters; immediate rRT-PCR testing should be performed when IgM antibody test results are positive or equivocal. This guidance also provides updated recommendations for the clinical management of pregnant women with confirmed or possible Zika virus infection. These recommendations will be updated when additional data become available.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[As more Zika virus infected individuals come into the USA and other countries where the virus is not being transmitted currently, or when local transmission is confirmed, these interim guidelines may be helpful. ProMED-mail subscribers with interest in this topic should access the full report which has additional references. Clinicians should be alert for changes in recommendations as they are issued. - Mod.TY]******[5] Prevention of sexual transmissionDate: Mon 25 Jul 2016Source: CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) [edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6529e2.htm?s_cid=mm6529e2_e#suggestedcitation>Brooks JT, Friedman A, Kachur RE, LaFlam M, Peters PJ, Jamieson DJ. Update: Interim Guidance for Prevention of Sexual Transmission of Zika Virus -- United States, July 2016. doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e2The recommendations in this report replace those previously issued and are now updated to reduce the risk for sexual transmission of Zika virus from both men and women to their sex partners. This guidance defines potential sexual exposure to Zika virus as having had sex with a person who has traveled to or lives in an area with active Zika virus transmission when the sexual contact did not include a barrier to protect against infection. Such barriers include male or female condoms for vaginal or anal sex and other barriers for oral sex. Sexual exposure includes vaginal sex, anal sex, oral sex, or other activities that might expose a sex partner to genital secretions. This guidance will be updated as more information becomes available.Updated Recommendations-----------------------Recommendations for pregnant couples. Zika virus infection is of particular concern during pregnancy. Pregnant women with sex partners (male or female) who live in or who have traveled to an area with active Zika virus transmission should consistently and correctly use barriers against infection during sex or abstain from sex for the duration of the pregnancy. These recommendations reduce the risk for sexual transmission of Zika virus during pregnancy, which could have adverse fetal effects. Pregnant women should discuss with their health care provider their own and their sex partner's history of having been in areas with active Zika virus transmission and history of illness consistent with Zika virus disease; providers can consult CDC's guidance for evaluation and testing of pregnant women.Recommendations for couples who are not pregnant and are not planning to become pregnant. Several factors could influence a couple's level of concern about sexual transmission of Zika virus. The risk for acquiring mosquito-borne Zika virus infection in areas with active transmission depends on the duration and extent of exposure to infected mosquitoes and the steps taken to prevent mosquito bites. According to currently available information, most Zika virus infections appear to be asymptomatic, and when illness does occur, it is usually mild, with symptoms lasting from several days to a week; severe disease requiring hospitalization is uncommon.Men and women who want to reduce the risk for sexual transmission of Zika virus should use barrier methods against infection consistently and correctly during sex or abstain from sex when one sex partner has traveled to or lives in an area with active Zika virus transmission. Based on expert opinion and on limited but evolving information about the sexual transmission of Zika virus, the recommended duration of consistent use of a barrier method against infection or abstinence from sex depends on whether the sex partner has confirmed infection or clinical illness consistent with Zika virus disease and whether the sex partner is male or female. The rationale for these time frames has been published previously.Couples who do not desire pregnancy should use available strategies to prevent unintended pregnancy and might consider multiple options, including (in addition to condoms, the only method that protects against both pregnancy and sexual transmission of Zika virus) use of the most effective contraceptive methods that can be used correctly and consistently. In addition, couples should be advised that correct and consistent use of barrier methods against infection, such as condoms, reduces the risk for other sexually transmitted infections.Zika Virus Testing and Sexual Transmission------------------------------------------At present, Zika virus testing for the assessment of risk for sexual transmission is of uncertain value, because current understanding of the duration and pattern of shedding of Zika virus in the male and female genitourinary tract is limited. Therefore, testing of specimens to assess risk for sexual transmission is currently not recommended.Zika virus testing is recommended for persons who have had possible sexual exposure to Zika virus and who develop signs or symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease. All pregnant women should be tested if they have had possible exposure to Zika virus, including sexual exposure. CDC urges health care providers to report to local and state health departments all cases of Zika virus disease, including those suspected to have occurred by sexual transmission.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[These recommendations may be useful for clinicians or travel medicine groups who are advising individuals or couples concerned about Zika virus infections in pregnant women with risk of fetal damage. ProMED-mail subscribers with interest in this topic should access the full report which has additional references. Clinicians should be alert for changes in recommendations as they are issued. - Mod.TY][A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6075>.]
