The Horse [edited]<http://www.thehorse.com/articles/37880/florida-confirms-new-eee-case-in-washington-county-horse>The Equine Disease Communication Center (EDCC) has reported that a new case of eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) was confirmed in a Washington County, Florida, horse on 20 Jul 2016.""The adult pony had no known vaccine history and no recent travel history,"" the EDCC said in a statement. ""Clinical signs began on 9 Jul 2016 and the horse was euthanized for humane reasons the same day. This is the 2nd confirmed EEE case in Washington County and case 13 in Florida for 2016.""A viral disease, EEE affects the central nervous system and is transmitted to horses by infected mosquitoes. Clinical signs of EEE include moderate to high fever, depression, lack of appetite, cranial nerve deficits (facial paralysis, tongue weakness, difficulty swallowing), behavioral changes (aggression, self-mutilation, or drowsiness), gait abnormalities, or severe central nervous system signs, such as head-pressing, circling, blindness, and seizures. The course of EEE can be swift, with death occurring 2 to 3 days after onset of clinical signs despite intensive care; fatality rates reach 75-80 percent among horses. Horses that survive might have long-lasting impairments and neurologic problems.Horse owners should also consult their private practicing veterinarian to determine an appropriate disease prevention plan for their horses. Vaccines have proven to be a very effective prevention tool. Horses that have been vaccinated in past years will need an annual booster shot. However, if an owner did not vaccinate their animal in previous years, the horse will need the two-shot vaccination series within a three- to six-week period.In addition to vaccinations, horse owners also need to reduce the mosquito populations and their possible breeding areas. Recommendations include removing stagnant water sources, keeping animals inside during the bugs' feeding times, which are typically early in the morning and evening, and using mosquito repellents.[Byline: Erica Larson]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The state of Florida can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/28492>. Washington County in northwest Florida can be seen on the map at <http://geology.com/county-map/florida-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]******[2] VirginiaDate: Mon 25 Jul 2016Source: The Horse [edited]<http://www.thehorse.com/articles/37890/virginia-confirms-third-equine-eee-case-of-2016>The Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services (VDACS) announced 22 Jul 2016 that it has confirmed the 3rd case of eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) in a Virginia horse this year [2016].In a statement on its Facebook page, the VDACS said the horse -- a mare from Chesapeake -- contracted the disease one day and died the next. The horse's vaccination history is unknown.The 1st 2 EEE cases in Virginia this year [2016] were both confirmed in horses residing in Suffolk.A viral disease, EEE affects the central nervous system and is transmitted to horses by infected mosquitoes. Clinical signs of EEE include moderate to high fever, depression, lack of appetite, cranial nerve deficits (facial paralysis, tongue weakness, difficulty swallowing), behavioral changes (aggression, self-mutilation, or drowsiness), gait abnormalities, or severe central nervous system signs, such as head-pressing, circling, blindness, and seizures. The course of EEE can be swift, with death occurring 2 to 3 days after onset of clinical signs despite intensive care; fatality rates reach 75-80 percent among horses. Horses that survive might have long-lasting impairments and neurologic problems.Horse owners should also consult their private practicing veterinarian to determine an appropriate disease prevention plan for their horses. Vaccines have proven to be a very effective prevention tool. Horses that have been vaccinated in past years will need an annual booster shot. However, if an owner did not vaccinate their animal in previous years, the horse will need the 2-shot vaccination series within a 3- to 6-week period.In addition to vaccinations, horse owners also need to reduce the mosquito populations and their possible breeding areas. Recommendations include removing stagnant water sources, keeping animals inside during the bugs' feeding times, which are typically early in the morning and evening, and using mosquito repellents.[Byline: Erica Larson]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The state of Virginia can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6420>. The independent city of Chesapeake can be seen on the map at <http://geology.com/county-map/virginia-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJThe most effective EEE prevention is vaccination. The vaccine is usually combined with vaccines for West Nile virus and western equine encephalitis. Most owners usually vaccinate in the spring, but immunity to EEE is the shortest and wanes within about 3-4 months. Owners are encouraged to vaccinate every 3 to 4 months to protect against EEE.""In the United States, equine vaccines are available for eastern equine encephalomyelitis (or eastern equine encephalitis, EEE), western equine encephalomyelitis (WEE), Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis (VEE), and West Nile virus encephalomyelitis.""The distribution of EEE has historically been restricted to the eastern, southeastern, and some southern states (but disease incidence is also reported in the upper Midwestern states of Ohio, Michigan, and Wisconsin). Outbreaks of WEE have been recorded in the western and mid-western states. Variants of WEE have caused sporadic cases in the northeast and southeast, most notably Florida. VEE occurs in South and Central America but has not been diagnosed in the United States for more than 35 years. The availability of licensed vaccine products combined with an inability to completely eliminate risk of exposure justifies immunization against EEE and WEE as core prophylaxis for all horses residing in or traveling to North America and any other geographic areas where EEE and/or WEE is endemic.""Transmission of EEE/WEE/VEE is by mosquitoes, and infrequently by other bloodsucking insects, to horses from wild birds or rodents, which serve as natural reservoirs for these viruses. Human beings are also susceptible to these diseases when the virus is transmitted to them by infected mosquitoes; however, horse-to-horse, or horse-to-human transmission by mosquitoes is highly unlikely, because the amount of virus in the blood of horses affected by EEE or WEE is small. The viremia that occurs with VEE is higher, and direct horse-to-horse or horse-to-human transmission is possible. Of these 3 encephalitides, WEE has the lowest mortality (about 50 percent). Eastern equine encephalomyelitis is the most virulent for horses, with mortality approaching 90 percent. Epidemiological evidence indicates that young horses are particularly susceptible to disease caused by EEE. Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis can also be lethal; however, some horses develop subclinical infections which result in lasting immunity.""The risk of exposure and geographic distribution of EEE and WEE vary from year to year with changes in distribution of insect vectors and reservoirs important in the natural ecology of the virus. EEE activity in mosquitoes and birds, and resultant disease in humans and equids, continues to cause concern along the East Coast and demonstrates northward encroachment. WEE has caused minimal disease in horses in the last 2 decades; however, the virus continues to be detected in mosquitoes and birds throughout the Western states. In addition, variants that cause clinical disease in equids have been detected in the eastern US.""VEE is a reportable foreign animal disease. Epidemics of VEE occur when the virus undergoes genetic change and develops greater virulence in avian and mammalian hosts. These viral variants are able to multiply to high levels in the horse, and then the horse becomes a reservoir in these outbreaks. Areas of Southern Texas, California, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and the West Coast of Florida are likely at the most risk for natural VEE encroachment from Central and South America.""Vaccination against VEE is controversial because:1. Vaccination against a foreign animal disease may confound testing in the event of an outbreak. However, vaccination against EEE/WEE will also cause cross-reaction in VEE antibody testing.2. Experimental and field data have demonstrated that previous infection with either EEE or WEE may provide cross-protection against VEE. It is therefore possible that EEE/WEE bivalent vaccination may provide partial cross-protection, although it is likely to be less than that following infection.3. A conditionally available modified live (MLV) vaccine has been released during previous outbreaks. Should an outbreak occur, it is likely that this highly attenuated MLV would be released, and this MLV provides superior protection against transmissible viremia.""In summary, horses that receive annual EEE/WEE vaccines may be partially protected against VEE infection. In the event of an outbreak, the availability of and vaccination with the highly effective MLV product would induce rapid, complete immunity while allowing for accurate surveillance before VEE specific vaccination. Killed VEE vaccine should be used only in high-risk areas of the US, at the discretion of the attending veterinarian, or when necessary, with input from state agriculture officials. The inactivated VEE vaccine is less effective that the MLV VEE vaccine, and will blunt responses to the MLV VEE vaccine.Vaccines--------""EEE/WEE vaccines currently available are formalin-inactivated adjuvanted whole-virus products. Early testing of bivalent (EEE/WEE) vaccines was performed by intracranial challenge with either EEE and WEE; the formalin-inactivated preparations were shown to be highly efficacious protecting against clinical disease. Currently, the only available VEE vaccines are killed products; an MLV would be conditionally released in the face of an outbreak.Vaccination schedules EEE/WEE-----------------------------""Adult horses previously vaccinated against EEE/WEE: annual revaccination must be completed prior to vector season in the spring. In animals at high risk or with limited immunity, more frequent vaccination or appropriately timed vaccination is recommended in order to induce protective immunity during periods of likely exposure. In areas where mosquitoes are active year-round, many veterinarians elect to vaccinate horses at 6-month intervals to ensure uniform protection throughout the year, although this practice is not specifically recommended by manufacturers of vaccines.""Adult horses, previously unvaccinated against EEE/WEE or of unknown vaccinal history: administer a primary series of 2 doses with a 4- to 6-week interval between doses. Revaccinate prior to the onset of the next vector season and annually thereafter.""Pregnant mares, previously vaccinated against EEE/WEE: vaccinate 4 to 6 weeks before foaling.""Pregnant mares, unvaccinated or having unknown vaccinal history: immediately begin a 2-dose primary series with a 4-week interval between doses. Booster at 4 to 6 weeks before foaling or prior to the onset of the next vector season -- whichever occurs first.""Foals of mares vaccinated against EEE/WEE in the pre-partum period: administer a primary 3-dose series beginning at 4 to 6 months of age. A 4- to 6-week interval between the 1st and 2nd doses is recommended. The 3rd dose should be administered at 10 to 12 months of age, prior to the onset of the next mosquito season.""In the southeastern US, due to earlier seasonal disease risk, vaccination may be started at 2 to 3 months of age. When initiating vaccinations in younger foals, a series of 4 primary doses should be administered, with a 4-week interval between the 1st and 2nd doses and a 4-week interval between the 2nd and 3rd doses. The 4th dose should be administered at 10 to 12 months of age, prior to the onset of the next mosquito season.""Foals of unvaccinated mares or having unknown vaccinal history: administer a primary series of 3 doses with a 30-day interval between the 1st and 2nd doses and a 60-day [8-week] interval between the 2nd and 3rd doses. The primary series of vaccinations should be initiated at 3 to 4 months of age and, where possible, be completed prior to the onset of the high-risk insect vector season. If the primary series is initiated during the mosquito vector season, an interval of 3 to 4 weeks between the 2nd and 3rd doses is preferable to the interval of 8 weeks described above.""Horses having been naturally infected and recovered: recovered horses likely develop lifelong immunity. Consider revaccination only if the immune status of the animal changes the risk for susceptibility to infection. Examples of these conditions would include the long-term use of corticosteroids and pituitary adenoma.""This comment has been extracted from <http://www.aaep.org/-i-165.html?osCsid=a18pv8jvdmk6hq4>. - Mod.TG]
