Contagion [edited]<http://www.contagionlive.com/news/enterovirus-associated-with-poliolike-syndrome-in-pediatric-patients>Following an outbreak of acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) identified at Children's Hospital Colorado in Aurora over 3 months in 2014, a potential association has been found between enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) infection and AFM in pediatric patients, according to the results of a study published recently in Emerging Infectious Diseases.Citation: Aliabadi N, Messacar K, Pastula DM, Robinson CC, Leshem E, Sejvar JJ, Nix WA, Oberste MS, Feikin DR, Dominguez SR: Enterovirus D68 infection in children with acute flaccid myelitis, Colorado, USA, 2014. Emerg Infect Dis. 2016; (8):1387-1394. doi: 10.3201/eid2208.151949. Available at <http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/22/8/15-1949_article>The study was presented by 1st author Negar Aliabadi, MD, from the Epidemic Intelligence Service and Division of Viral Diseases at the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta, and his colleagues. In describing the rationale for the study, Dr. Aliabadi told Contagion, ""Since August 2014, when CDC began receiving an increase in reports of acute flaccid myelitis (AFM), we have been investigating cases and clusters of this illness to better understand potential causes and how often the illness occurs. The increase in reported AFM cases occurred around the same time as a national outbreak of severe respiratory illness caused by EV-D68, a type of enterovirus (<http://www.cdc.gov/non-polio-enterovirus/about/ev-d68.html#outbreak>). The CDC has tested many different specimens collected from children with AFM for a wide range of pathogens that can result in AFM, including enteroviruses, some of which are known to cause neurologic illness. However, to date, we have not found a definitive link to EV-D68. The CDC conducted this study of the Colorado AFM cases to better understand this illness, and to determine if there was any epidemiologic association between EV-D68 infection and AFM.""To further investigate a possible epidemiologic association between EV-D68 and AFM, Dr. Aliabadi and his colleagues conducted a retrospective case-control study of children who had nasopharyngeal specimens collected for the detection of respiratory pathogens in Colorado during the epidemiologic weeks when confirmed AFM cases were identified. The presence of EV-D68 in these specimens was assessed and compared between the 11 case-patients and 2 groups of control children.""As described above, the CDC conducted this study with the expectation of learning more about AFM and the possible causes. The case-control study showed an epidemiologic association between EV-D68 and AFM. Between 8 Aug 2014 and 14 Oct 2014, 11 children were identified at Children's Hospital Colorado as having characteristic symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis (AFM): acute limb weakness with abnormal clinical and radiologic findings. A total of 10 of the 11 children had a respiratory illness preceding AFM and 4 had nasal specimens test positive for EV-D68. We found that children with AFM were 10 times more likely to have EV-D68 infection in the nasal cavity as compared to control groups of children tested for a respiratory illness who were seen in the emergency department,"" Dr. Aliabadi said.Regarding the broader implications of his team's study results, Dr. Aliabadi told Contagion, ""This is only 1 study, and this was the 1st epidemiologic study of the 2014 AFM cases. The study showed an epidemiological association between EV-D68 and AFM. However, an association does not prove that EV-D68 caused AFM in this cluster of cases in Colorado given the limitations of the study. AFM is rare, and there were only 11 cases available to be enrolled in this study. Although EV-D68 was detected in the nasal cavity of 4 children with AFM, it was not detected in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Detection of EV-D68 in the nasal cavity does not prove causation of AFM. Virus detected in the CSF would have been the most definitive evidence to link AFM to EV-D68. These data suggest a possible causal link, but there is still a gap in epidemiologic data and data from extensive lab testing. Continued surveillance and additional targeted epidemiologic studies are needed. CDC will continue to investigate AFM cases, risk factors, and possible causes of this illness. We understand that Americans may be concerned about these illnesses. Severe illness is always a concern to us, especially when children are affected. We will continue to share information as soon as we have it, and post updates on our website (<http://www.cdc.gov/acute-flaccid-myelitis/afm-surveillance.html>). We encourage clinicians to continue to be vigilant and immediately report any patients who meet the clinical case definition (<http://www.cdc.gov/acute-flaccid-myelitis/hcp/case-definition.html>) for AFM to their state or local health department.""[Byline: William Perlman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Human enterovirus D68 belongs to the enterovirus D species, Enterovirus genus, Picornaviridae family. Biologically close to rhinoviruses, EV-D68 mainly has been associated with acute respiratory infection with clinical presentation ranging from mild to severe disease requiring intensive care. The study discussed in this report shows an epidemiologic association between AFM and EV-D68 infection among children with respiratory illness during 2014 in Colorado. Previously, temporal associations have been reported between AFM clusters and increases in hospital admissions for respiratory symptoms and detection of EV-D68 in AFM case-patients. The current study suggests a possible causal link. Still a gap remains demonstrating cause and effect, which continued surveillance with timely and comprehensive specimen collection and testing for EV-D68 may help answer.See map of the USA showing location of Colorado at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/8271>.]
