Global Meat News [edited]<http://www.globalmeatnews.com/Safety-Legislation/Massive-anthrax-outbreak-wounds-Russia-s-venison-sector>The anthrax outbreak in the Yamal Peninsula, the Artic part of Russia, is believed to be the largest for 75 years. The outbreak has killed 1500 northern deer and, with the figure set to rise, fears over exports of venison have begun to surface. Besides, so far there are 13 people that have been hospitalized related to anthrax. Local veterinary services believe the disease probably emanated from animal burial sites. ""This disease has been present in our country for a long time and we have 35 000 officially registered animal with anthrax in burial sites,"" said Julia Delmina, deputy head of Russian sanitary body Rospotrebnadzor. ""These are places where anthrax spores could be found in the soil.""""We are now conducting another large burial, where we will pour bleach into the ground, build fences and set up a special marker in navigation systems, so that, for the next 25 years, any grazing of agricultural animals here will be banned,"" added Vyacheslav Hritin, head of Salekhard Veterinary Center, which fights against the disease.Scientists said it was probable that this last outbreak was connected to abnormal heat, which resulted in melting the permafrost where spores of anthrax can live for decades. At the moment, temperatures in the region are going over 30 deg C [approx. 86 deg F], very unusual for this area of Russia.""On the one hand the permafrost began to melt, on the other the animals were shorter of fodder and they ate plants together with the land,"" explained Professor Irina Donnik, rector of the Ural State Agricultural University. ""It is obvious that there was a cattle cemetery here at some stage. This disease is transmitted very rarely from animal to animal; more often it moves via the feed base.""In total, Yamar Peninsula has nearly 700 000 head of northern deer, of which only 480 000 are vaccinated, according to official information. The region supplies meat to most parts of Russia and has exported at least 500 tones of venison to Europe, and other parts of the world. Despite the concerns of experts, local officials have denied any possibility that the outbreak will hurt export supplies. ""There is not even a small chance that the contaminated meat could get into the slaughter complexes, as each shipment is tested individually in accordance to the highest standards,"" said Natalia Khlopunova, press-secretary for the governor of Yamal Peninsula Dmitri Kobylkin. ""It is our interest that the meat we supply for export has the highest quality, as always.""Several insiders have said that the disease has already claimed more than 3000 head of deer and that there are still several herds in the quarantine zone. In addition, ecologists have warned that there are already scavengers eating the dead animals, so unless active measures are taken quickly, the area where the disease has spread could grow significantly in a short period of time.[Byline: Vladislav Vorotnikov]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The changes since yesterday are that a massive burial is planned using bleach and fencing. The cause of the outbreak is presently considered that with the high temperatures the permafrost melted at an old burial site thereby allowing the spores to float up to the surface. With the heat there has been a lack of grazing resulting in the grazing reindeer consuming more soil than usual. Yamal Peminsula has 700 000 northern deer (reindeer) of which only 480 000 are vaccinated. It exports venison to most parts of Russian and some 5000 tonnes to Europe as well as to other parts of the world; the period for that 5000 tonnes was not stated. Extraordinary precautions are being taken to prevent any marketed venison being contaminated. - Mod.MHJ]
