Xinhua News [edited]<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-07/27/c_135542539.htm>WHO declares Brazil free of measles-----------------------------------The World Health Organization (WHO) on Tue [26 Jul 2016] declared Brazil free of measles, after no case of the disease was registered in the last year.The eradication of measles is the conclusion of work spanning several years. Brazil saw no domestic cases of measles from 1985 to 2000, although it broke out in 2013 in the northeastern states of Pernambuco and Ceara, said Merceline Dalh-Regis, president of the WHO's international committee for the eradication of measles, in a statement.The WHO said it had worked alongside the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO) to stamp out the disease, with a joint investment of 1.2 million reais (USD 335 000) going towards measles control and the hiring of 165 dedicated nursing staff in Brazil.""This is without a doubt a big step forward and conclusive proof of what vaccinations can do. We have eradicated smallpox, polio, rubella, measles and we are moving ahead with controlling various other diseases,"" Renato Kfouri, vice-president of the Brazilian Immunization Society, told the O Globo daily.In the coming months, the WHO will issue a certification for the eradication of measles to Brazil.Measles can be transmitted orally, through mucus or saliva and mainly affects children. It can be spread rapidly through the air due to sneezing or a cough, and the 1st symptoms appear after 10 days with red spots on the skin.While most patients recover within 3 weeks, it can cause pneumonia, blindness or even death in malnourished children.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This is a big accomplishment and Brazil should be very proud. It is one less infectious disease they need to worry about. A map of Brazil may be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6>. - Mod.LK]******[2] South Sudan (Warap state)Date: Tue 26 Jul 2016Source: Radio Tamazuj [edited]<https://radiotamazuj.org/en/article/measles-cases-rise-warrap>Measles cases rise in Warrap----------------------------At least 5 people have died from measles and 280 cases have been reported in Warrap [Warap] state [South Sudan], a local health official told Radio Tamazuj. Local health officials also say that there is a low turnout of children being vaccinated.""In the whole of former Warrap state, including Abyei, many children have been infected and others have died of measles,"" the Expanded Immunization Programme manager James Ngor Ayom told Radio Tamazuj.Ngor said that Twic has been vaccinated but has 85 suspected measles cases, and 42 cases with 2 deaths in Tonj South. In Gogrial West there are at least 61 cases, and Kuac South has at least 47 cases of measles with 3 deaths.UNICEF, WHO, World Vision and other partners are expected to begin vaccination programs this week in Kuajok, and then will be expanded to other areas.All children should be routinely vaccinated from polio and measles cases, according to Warrap state UNICEF Programme Coordinator Shadrach Maper Adong. She also emphasized that the program is free.""There have not been any health workers who have asked to pay money for these vaccines."" Maper said. ""Even 1 SSP is not paid for the treatment of children.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Warap is one of the 10 states of South Sudan. This report of 5 deaths from measles demonstrates the serious nature of infection, especially in children suffering from malnutrition.The disease remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally, despite the availability of a safe and effective vaccine. Approximately 114 900 people died from measles in 2014 -- mostly children under the age of 5.Measles is caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family and it is normally passed through direct contact and through the air. The virus infects the mucous membranes, then spreads throughout the body. Measles is a human disease and is not known to occur in animals.Accelerated immunization activities have had a major impact on reducing measles deaths. During 2000-2014, measles vaccination prevented an estimated 17.1 million deaths. Global measles deaths have decreased by 79 per cent from an estimated 546 800 in 2000 to 114 900 in 2014.Signs and symptomsThe 1st sign of measles is usually a high fever, which begins about 10-12 days after exposure to the virus, and lasts 4-7 days. A runny nose, a cough, red and watery eyes, and small white spots inside the cheeks can develop in the initial stage. After several days, a rash erupts, usually on the face and upper neck. Over about 3 days, the rash spreads, eventually reaching the hands and feet. The rash lasts for 5-6 days, and then fades. On average, the rash occurs 14 days after exposure to the virus (within a range of 7-18 days).Most measles-related deaths are caused by complications associated with the disease. Complications are more common in children under the age of 5, or adults over the age of 20. The most serious complications include blindness, encephalitis (an infection that causes brain swelling), severe diarrhoea and related dehydration, ear infections, or severe respiratory infections such as pneumonia. Severe measles is more likely among poorly nourished young children, especially those with insufficient vitamin A, or whose immune systems have been weakened by HIV/AIDS or other diseases.In populations with high levels of malnutrition and a lack of adequate health care, up to 10 per cent of measles cases result in death. Women infected while pregnant are also at risk of severe complications and the pregnancy may end in miscarriage or preterm delivery. People who recover from measles are immune for the rest of their lives.Who is at risk?Unvaccinated young children are at highest risk of measles and its complications, including death. Unvaccinated pregnant women are also at risk. Any non-immune person (who has not been vaccinated or was vaccinated but did not develop immunity) can become infected.Measles is still common in many developing countries -- particularly in parts of Africa and Asia. The overwhelming majority (more than 95 per cent) of measles deaths occur in countries with low per capita incomes and weak health infrastructures.Measles outbreaks can be particularly deadly in countries experiencing or recovering from a natural disaster or conflict. Damage to health infrastructure and health services interrupts routine immunization, and overcrowding in residential camps greatly increases the risk of infection.Excerpted and edited from <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/>.A map of South Sudan may be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/27446>. - Mod.LK]
