J Neuroinfect Dis 7:218. doi:10.4172/2314-7326.1000218<http://www.omicsonline.com/open-access/outbreak-of-neurochikungunya-in-northeastern-brazil-2314-7326-1000218.php?aid=74708>Martins HAL, Bernardino SN, Ribas KH, Santos CC, Antunes T, et al. (2016) Outbreak of Neuro-Chikungunya in Northeastern Brazil. AbstractChikungunya virus, an alphavirus often associated with large epidemic outbreaks, has a serious social impact. The main symptoms are fever, rash and arthralgia, but recently neurologic complications have been described as an important cause of morbidity. During a large outbreak in at least 5 towns in poor states of the Brazilian northeast over recent months, 22 patients with chikungunya confirmed by serologic tests who presented some degree of neurologic involvement were assessed in our department. Changes in consciousness were present in almost half of the patients and epileptic seizures and persecutory delusions were present in 3 and 4 patients, respectively. As in Brazil there are insufficient serologic tests for patients with a clinical picture of neuro-chikungunya, this is probably a very underdiagnosed disease. The outcomes of the neurologic symptoms were good in all patients of the current series, in contrast with the permanent sequelae reported by other authors.--Communicated by:Roland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[One hopes that this report will encourage neurologic assessment of patients with serologically or virologically confirmed chikungunya virus infections, to get a better idea of the frequency of changes and sequelae. - Mod.TY]******[3] Fetal and neonatal death, BrazilDate: Thu 28 Jul 2016Source: RepÌ rter DiÌÁrio [in Portuguese, trans. Rapporteur Mary Marshall, edited]<http://www.reporterdiario.com.br/noticia/2213107/recife-registra-morte-de-feto-e-de-recem-nascido-infectados-por-chikungunya/>The Recife Health Department confirmed on Thursday, 28 [Jul 2016], 2 cases previously unpublished related to chikungunya in Pernambuco: the 1st stillbirth and the 1st death of a newborn caused by the disease. The deaths occurred respectively in February and March this year [2016], but only now had all laboratory confirmations been completed. The announcement triggered an alert among specialists in maternal and child health.According to the executive secretary of Health Surveillance of Recife, Cristiane Penaforte, the mother of the fetus infected by chikungunya [virus] presented symptoms in the last trimester of pregnancy. The intrauterine death was diagnosed at the 38th week of pregnancy, 3 days after the onset of symptoms reported by pregnant woman, which included joint pain and a rash over the body. The woman is a resident of the Arruda neighborhood in the north, and was treated at a private hospital. Also according to the secretary, the fetus was male and did not show any malformation signs.The newborn baby, also a male, was 15 days old and lived with his family in the Estancia neighborhood in the west. He died in early March [2016], 4 days after presenting the 1st symptoms of chikungunya [virus infection]. The Recife Health Secretariat is still investigating the death of a 2nd newborn that occurred in the neighborhood of Campina Barreto, in the north. The boy, of one month and 8 days, died in April [2016] with symptoms of the disease. Laboratory tests should be completed next week.Specialists were concerned about the news. ""These confirmations bring a light to some questions and can help us understand a little more about this disease. It is important that people do not panic, especially pregnant women and families with newborn babies.Caution remains the key word. We all agreed that we act in confronting the arboviruses, so we have to look into every new piece of information to take away positive action to care for our patients,"" said infectious disease physician Fernando Lima, of the Oswaldo Cruz University Hospital, one of the reference centers for the treatment of arbovirus diseases.""This is a new disease for everyone and, given this, we are keeping on alert while studying the disease. Therefore, it is necessary for pregnant women and the general population to continue using [mosquito] repellent, wear clothes that cover the body more and avoid places with plenty of mosquitoes,"" advised Cristiane Penaforte, Executive Secretary of Health Surveillance of Recife.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The newborn is likely the ill one mentioned in a 27 Jun 2016 report (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20160702.4323117) who apparently later went on to die. Fortunately, fatal cases due to chikungunya virus infection are rare, but in the absence of laboratory testing, might be miscategorized as dengue fatalities in localities where both viruses are being transmitted. - Mod.TY]
