WHO Emergencies, Yellow Fever Situation Report [edited]<http://www.who.int/emergencies/yellow-fever/situation-reports/28-july-2016/en/>A yellow fever outbreak was detected in Luanda, Angola late in December 2015. The 1st cases were confirmed by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa on 19 Jan 2016 and by the Institut Pasteur Dakar (IP-D) on 20 Jan [2016]. Subsequently, a rapid increase in the number of cases has been observed.SummaryAngola: 3748 suspected casesIn Angola, as of 21 Jul 2016, a total of 3748 suspected cases have been reported, of which 879 are confirmed. The total number of reported deaths is 364, of which 119 were reported among confirmed cases. Suspected cases have been reported in all 18 provinces, and confirmed cases have been reported in 16 of 18 provinces and 80 of 125 reporting districts.Mass reactive vaccination campaigns 1st began in Luanda and have now expanded to cover most of the other affected parts of Angola. Recently, the campaigns have focused on border areas. All districts continued with house to house immunization campaigns and routine vaccination.Democratic Republic of the Congo:1907 suspected casesAccording to the latest confirmed information, DRC has reported 1907 suspected cases (as of 20 Jul [2016]) and 68 confirmed cases (as of 24 Jun [2016]), including 95 reported deaths. Cases have been reported in 22 health zones in 5 of 26 provinces. Of the 68 confirmed cases, 59 were imported from Angola, 2 are sylvatic (not related to the outbreak) and 7 are autochthonous.The recent technical difficulties at the national laboratory in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) have been resolved, and the laboratory confirmation of yellow fever cases in DRC has resumed. According to the preliminary results of tests performed on a backlog samples, 7 new patients have tested positive for yellow fever. Additional investigations to determine the definitive status of these cases are ongoing. Until these investigations are completed, the official case count in DRC remains unchanged.In DRC, surveillance efforts have increased, and vaccination campaigns have centered on affected health zones in Kinshasa and Kongo Central and Kwango. Reactive vaccination campaigns started on 20 Jul [2016] in Kisenso health zone in Kinshasa province and in Kahemba, Kajiji and Kisandji health zones in Kwango province.Seven countries (Brazil, Chad, Colombia, Ghana, Guinea, Peru and Uganda) have reported yellow fever outbreaks or sporadic cases not linked to the Angolan outbreak.An Emergency Committee (EC) was convened on 19 May 2016. The WHO Director-General accepted the EC's assessment that the urban yellow fever outbreaks in Angola and DRC are serious public health events which warrant intensified national action and enhanced international support. The situation does not currently constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.The WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization reviewed existing evidence that demonstrates that using 1/5th of a standard vaccine dose would still provide protection against the disease for at least 12 months and possibly longer. This approach, known as fractional dosing, will be implemented in a pre-emptive mass vaccination campaign in DRC in Kinshasa.- The outbreak in Angola is receding, and no confirmed case has been reported in the country during July (as of 21 Jul [2016]). The confirmed case with the most recent date of symptom onset, 23 Jun [2016], was reported in Cuanhama district in Cunene province. However, a high level of vigilance needs to be maintained throughout the country.- In DRC, the situation remains concerning, as the outbreak has spread to 3 provinces. Given the presence and activity of the vector _Aedes_ in the country, the outbreak might extend to other provinces, in particular Kasai, Kasai Central and Lualaba.- Transmission of yellow fever in Angola and DRC is mainly concentrated in cities; however, there is a high risk of spread and local transmission to other provinces in both countries. In addition, there is risk of potential spread to bordering countries, especially those classified as low-risk (i.e. Namibia, Zambia) and where the population, travelers and foreign workers are not vaccinated for yellow fever.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp[It is encouraging to see the incidence of YF declining in Angola. The situation in the DR Congo is less clear and not so encouraging. An extensive vaccination campaign is scheduled for August 2016, when a new lot of vaccine arrives. One hopes that this new shipment of vaccine is both timely and adequate to provide at least 80 percent coverage in areas of current transmission and of further risk. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the locations of the African countries mentioned can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3948>. - Mod.TY]******[2] New VaccineDate: Wed 27 Jul 2016Source: NIH [edited]<https://www.nih.gov/news-events/nih-launches-early-stage-yellow-fever-vaccine-trial>The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of the National Institutes of Health, has begun an early-stage clinical trial of an investigational vaccine designed to protect against yellow fever virus. The Phase 1 study is evaluating whether an experimental vaccine developed by the Danish biopharmaceutical company Bavarian Nordic is safe, tolerable and has the potential to prevent yellow fever virus infection.""Yellow fever has recently re-emerged as a major public health threat in parts of Africa. Although a vaccine exists to prevent this serious disease, it is currently in short supply, and it is not recommended for certain populations, such as pregnant women and people older than 60 years,"" said NIAID Director Anthony S. Fauci, M.D. ""We must develop new options for preventing this terrible disease.""As of 21 Jul 2016, the WHO has reported a total of 3682 suspected yellow fever cases with 361 deaths in the African country of Angola. Meanwhile, another 1798 suspected cases have been reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), including 85 deaths. Cases with links to Angola have also been reported in Kenya and China.More than 105 million people in Africa have been vaccinated against yellow fever in mass campaigns since 2006, according to the WHO. Despite this success, vaccine supplies are limited. In addition, in very rare cases, the current yellow fever vaccine can produce severe adverse complications, such as neurologic side effects, multiple organ system dysfunction and death. For this reason, the vaccine should not be given to infants, the elderly, pregnant women and those with compromised immune systems.Bavarian Nordic's experimental yellow fever vaccine, dubbed MVA-BN-YF, is based on the company's proprietary MVA-BN platform, which uses an attenuated (weakened) version of the Modified Vaccinia Ankara (MVA) virus as a vaccine vector to carry yellow fever virus genes into the body. According to Bavarian Nordic, more than 7600 people, including 1000 individuals who are immunocompromised, have been safely vaccinated with MVA-BN-based vaccines.The placebo-controlled, double-blinded clinical trial will enroll 90 healthy men and women ages 18-45 who have never been infected with a flavivirus, the family of viruses that includes yellow fever virus, West Nile virus, dengue and Zika virus, among others. Participants will be divided into 6 groups: One will receive the currently licensed yellow fever vaccine (15 participants) and 5 groups (15 participants each) will receive the investigational Bavarian Nordic vaccine, either with or without an adjuvant, a substance that is added to a vaccine to increase the body's immune response to the vaccine. The investigational vaccine will be administered intramuscularly, while the licensed yellow fever vaccine will be administered subcutaneously. Trial participants will receive one or 2 doses of vaccine or placebo, separated by a month.Previous laboratory and animal studies have suggested that combining MVA-BN with ISA 720, an experimental immune-boosting adjuvant that has been used in prior clinical trials, induces a strong immune response after a single dose of vaccine. One goal of the study will be to assess whether 2 doses of unadjuvanted vaccine or a single dose of ISA 720 adjuvanted vaccine could provide protection against yellow fever.The multi-site clinical trial will be conducted by NIAID-funded Vaccine and Treatment Evaluation Units (VTEUs) at the University of Iowa in Iowa City and Saint Louis University in Missouri. Emory Vaccine Center in Decatur, Georgia will assist in evaluating data.Additional details about the trial can be found at ClinicalTrials.gov using the identifier NCT02743455.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The major problem with the traditional yellow fever vaccine is not its efficacy but rather the slow and laborious process that its manufacture requires. This vaccine is made in specific pathogen-free embryonated eggs that have to be harvested by hand and processed. The supply of eggs is a limiting factor. A vaccine that lends itself to scale-up, is relatively inexpensive, and is both safe and effective is urgently needed. One hopes that this new vaccinia-vectored vaccine will meet those criteria. - Mod.TY]******[3] Fractional vaccine doseDate: 25 Jul 2016Source: BioRxiv [edited]<http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/07/25/053421>Fractional Dosing of Yellow Fever Vaccine to Extend Supply: A Modeling StudyAuthors: Joseph T. Wu, Corey M. Peak, Gabriel M. Leung,  Marc LipsitchAbstractBackground The ongoing yellow fever (YF) epidemic in Angola strains the global vaccine supply, prompting WHO to adopt dose sparing for its vaccination campaign in Kinshasa in July-August 2016. Although a 5-fold fractional-dose vaccine is similar to standard-dose vaccine in safety and immunogenicity, efficacy is untested. There is an urgent need to ensure the robustness of fractional-dose vaccination by elucidating the conditions under which dose fractionation would reduce transmission.Methods We estimate the effective reproductive number for YF in Angola using disease natural history and case report data. With simple mathematical models of YF transmission, we calculate the infection attack rate (IAR, the proportion of population infected over the course of an epidemic) under varying levels of transmissibility and 5-fold fractional-dose vaccine efficacy for 2 vaccination scenarios: (i) random vaccination in a hypothetical population that is completely susceptible; (ii) the Kinshasa vaccination campaign in July-August 2016 with different age cutoff for fractional-dose vaccines. Findings We estimate the effective reproductive number early in the Angola outbreak was between 5.2 and 7.1. If vaccine action is all-or-nothing (i.e. a proportion VE of vaccinees receives complete and the remainder receive no protection), n-fold fractionation can dramatically reduce IAR as long as efficacy VE exceeds 1/n. This benefit threshold becomes more stringent if vaccine action is leaky (i.e. the susceptibility of each vaccinee is reduced by a factor that is equal to the vaccine efficacy VE). The age cutoff for fractional-dose vaccines chosen by the WHO for the Kinshasa vaccination campaign (namely, 2 years) provides the largest reduction in IAR if the efficacy of 5-fold fractional-dose vaccines exceeds 20 percent.Interpretation Dose fractionation is a very effective strategy for reducing infection attack rate that would be robust with a large margin for error in case fractional-dose VE is lower than expected.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[Until there is objective data on the efficacy of mass application of dose-sparing involving thousands of vaccines, there is likely to be some concern about its use. The obvious problem is that in the face of an outbreak, given limited human resources and challenging logistical problems to overcome, mounting a prospective study, however desirable, is unlikely to be carried out. Even so, some useful observations will emerge from the dose-sparing vaccinations in Kinshasa and other localities where it is tried. - Mod.TY******[4] Mobile laboratoryDate: Thu 28 Jul 2016Source: WHO update [edited]<http://www.who.int/features/2016/yellow-fever-labs/en/>""Treating a yellow fever patient is reliant on having the right diagnosis. This is dependent on having the necessary laboratory capacity to quickly identify the disease,"" says Dr Pierre Formenty, an expert in haemorrhagic fevers at WHO and Manager of the Emerging Dangerous Pathogens Laboratory Network.Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes. The disease is difficult to diagnose because it has similar symptoms as a range of other diseases, such as malaria and dengue. With more than 5000 suspected yellow fever cases and more than 400 deaths reported in Angola and Democratic Republic of the Congo, getting an accurate diagnosis is critical to saving lives and ending the outbreak.Reliable and timely lab results are essential for decision-making in almost all aspects of health services, especially during disease outbreaks. Diagnosing yellow fever is challenging. Oftentimes there are delays between when the sample is collected and transported to when it is analysed.Diagnosing yellow fever is done by testing a blood sample to detect the virus. In later stages of the disease, this is more difficult to detect. In this case, more sophisticated blood tests (known as ELISA [enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay] and PRNT [plaque reduction neutralization test]) are needed, and these can only be done in specialized laboratories.In order to strengthen and fast track diagnosis, WHO has supported the deployment of a mobile laboratory from the European Union to Democratic Republic of the Congo.This mobile lab brings much-needed equipment and supplies for testing blood samples for yellow fever. Packaged into several boxes, the lab is portable and easy to set-up within any existing health facility or building.The mobile lab will support the Institut National de Recherche Biom̩dicale by providing testing capacity in Kahembe in Kwango province for a period of 3 months. The team, consisting of 5 international and 2 national laboratory scientists, will save critical hours by testing the samples on-site, thus reducing the need to transport them over long distances. Between 50 to 100 patients can receive their results within a day.The European Union mobile lab is supported by the European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (ECHO) Emergency Response Coordination Centre in collaboration with the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network and the Emerging and Dangerous Laboratory Network.Building local capacity for lasting resultsIn addition to the mobile lab, 2 laboratory experts from Institut Pasteur, Paris, arrived in Democratic Republic of the Congo on 17 Jul [2016] to provide additional technical capacity.In Angola, WHO has been working with the Institut Pasteur and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to train laboratory technicians at the National Public Health Institute to strengthen yellow fever diagnostic capacity. This support includes establishing the more complex blood (ELISA) test, one of the key diagnostic tools used to confirm infection with yellow fever, and training 10 national staff to run the test.From diagnosis to action""Aside from getting patients on the right treatment, faster diagnosis helps to plan the response better, such as identifying where to conduct mass vaccination campaigns in the affected countries,"" says Dr Formenty.Mass reactive vaccination campaigns in Angola and Democratic Republic of the Congo have reached nearly 14.5 million people. The emergency vaccination campaigns have been crucial in slowing transmission of the outbreak.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[Bringing a yellow fever (YF) outbreak under control is a race against time. Having a YF diagnosis in one day versus a week or more is a tremendous advantage. It will be of great interest to see how the mobile laboratory works in the field in the DR Congo. Even in the rainy season when many roads become impassable to larger vehicles, it may be possible to get samples taken in the field and transported relatively quickly to the mobile lab via motor bike. Training local personnel should provide enhanced laboratory capability over a long period of time. - Mod.TY]
