The Nation [edited]<http://www.nationmultimedia.com/national/Kuwaiti-teenager-becomes-third-MERS-case-in-Thaila-30291785.html>Thailand has found a 3rd case of the Middle East respiratory syndrome corona virus (MERS-CoV) in an 18-year-old Kuwaiti man, Disease Control Department (DCD) chief Amnuay Kajeena revealed yesterday [30 Jul 2016].The incident prompted the DCD to set up a special coordination centre at its head office to trace those exposed to him, including those on the same flight.The patient, who entered Thailand on 25 Jul 2016 along with his father and grandmother, was being treated in an isolated room, while the 2 relatives as well as a taxi driver were put on quarantine. After 14 days, when the patient's condition improves and he is cured of the infection, he would be allowed to go home, Amnuay added.Amnuay said the family had come to seek treatment for the grandmother's knee problem when her grandson developed flu-like symptoms on [26 Jul 2016]. The private hospital that treated the grandmother collected his sample for lab test, which showed the next day that he had MERS-CoV.The DCD stepped in and took the man for treatment to an isolated room at the Bamrasnaradura Infectious Diseases Institute in Nonthaburi last Thursday.""The patient's fever has come down, and he does not have any worrisome symptoms. 14 days after his treatment started, if the lab test results show he is free of the infection, he would be released from the institute,"" he said, adding that the young man's 2 close relatives as well as a taxi driver were also brought under the institute's care.Amnuay explained that this teenager, despite detection of the virus in him, was categorised as a person ""likely to fall ill"" from MERS-CoV, apart from 2 other categories of ""confirmed"" patients and the ""variable group."" The tests of his bodily fluids at 4 labs (Medical Science Department, Bamrasnaradura Infectious Diseases Institute, Chulalongkorn Hospital and Ramathibodi Hospital) found the virus, but the results had some uncertainty pending confirmation from experts.The teenager was the country's 3rd case of MERS-CoV and the 2nd case found this year [2016]. The 1st case was found last year [2015] in a 75-year-old Middle Eastern man, and the 2nd case was found in January 2016 in a 71-year-old Omani man. All were admitted to the Bamrasnaradura Infectious Diseases Institute until they recovered and returned to their home countries. As of [25 Jul 2016], the World Health Organisation reported that 1791 patients were confirmed to have MERS-CoV and 640 had died from the infection in 27 countries, most of them in the Middle East.[Byline: Poungchompoo Prasert]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[It is curious that the media reports are hesitant to fully confirm this individual as MERS-CoV infected, while there is mention that the detection of the virus was confirmed by 4 different laboratories in country.We await further information on studies performed [PCR? serology?] and epidemiologic investigations of possible high risk exposures this individual may have had in the 2 weeks preceding onset of illness.As mentioned above, this is now the 3rd individual in Thailand for ""medical tourism"" from the Middle East in the past 2 years in whom laboratory tests confirmed MERS-CoV infection. The prior 2 cases were Omani nationals. All 3 individuals had relatively minor clinical manifestations of the infection. Of note, since 2012 when the MERS-CoV was identified, Kuwait has reported a total of 4 cases including one death attributable to MERS-CoV infection, and Oman has reported 7 cases including 3 deaths. The presence of these milder clinical presentations may be indicative of a higher prevalence of infection in these countries but lower detection, as clinicians previously were preferentially testing those individuals with SARI (severe acute respiratory illnesses).Thailand is to be commended for the detection of these milder cases. As a country with many ""medical tourists,"" screening for infectious diseases reported in other parts of the world is an important disease control activity. The high index of suspicion and rapid isolation of these cases thus far has most likely helped prevent nosocomial transmission in the country.The HealthMap/ProMED map of Thailand can be found at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/151> and of Kuwait at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/129>. - Mod.MPP]
