Horsetalk [edited]<http://www.horsetalk.co.nz/2016/07/30/compelling-evidence-equine-flu-virus-humans/#ixzz4G3Q8qFsg>Strong evidence exists that the equine influenza virus can occasionally infect humans, according to scientists, who suggest closer surveillance for novel flu viruses among horses is warranted.""The historical, observational, and experimental data are compelling in supporting the premise that equine influenza virus infections occasionally occur in man,"" Tai Xie and his colleagues reported in a scientific review. ""While in recent years, human infections with equine influenza viruses have not often been associated with signs of infection, the propensity for influenza A viruses to change makes these viruses worthy of our attention,"" they said.He singled out the H7N7 strain, last isolated in horses in the late 1970s, as a particular risk. ""Should H7N7 equine influenza virus strains again emerge, most humans would have little cross-reacting antibody, and the threat to humans might be quite different than that commonly seen today for H3N8.""We believe these observations support close surveillance for novel influenza virus emergence among equids.""The scientists, writing in the peer-reviewed journal Pathogens, noted that there were mixed opinions among scientists over whether the equine influenza virus can infect humans. The review team set out to examine evidence that equine flu viruses were zoonotic -- that is, capable of being spread between animals and humans. They carried out what they described as a systematic and comprehensive review of relevant English, Chinese, and Mongolian scientific literature. In all, 16 scientific articles met their inclusion criteria for their review. There was, they said, considerable experimental and observational evidence that at least H3N8 equine influenza viruses have occasionally infected people.Influenza A virus-like-illnesses has been recognized in horses since at least 1299. A particularly well-documented influenza-like epizootic occurred among US horses during 1872, causing widespread damage to transportation and commerce. Researchers have suggested it may have originated from birds. However, since the 1930s, only 2 major subtypes of equine influenza viruses have been detected in ill horses: H7N7 and H3N8. The last H7N7 viruses were isolated in the late 1970s, with only variants of H3N8 viruses causing sporadic outbreaks since then. With the exception of recent H3N8 equine flu variants which have caused outbreaks in dogs, and possibly an infection in a camel, recent equine flu outbreaks have not been associated with spill-over to non-equid species.The review team said they found considerable historical evidence of equine influenza virus infections in man. Other researchers had observed that, from 1658 to the early 20th century, equine influenza virus outbreaks in horses often occurred 3 weeks or so before human influenza-like-illnesses. ""In particular, scholars have implicated the 1889 human pandemic as likely caused by a H3N8 equine influenza virus. Serological studies, published in the 1960s, of people who lived during that 1892 era, are most compelling in documenting elevated antibodies against H3N8 equine influenza virus,"" they said.Several healthy human equine influenza virus challenge experiments were conducted in the 1960s, the scientists noted. In 1965, hospitalized volunteers received challenges with live equine H3N8 virus and were monitored for evidence of infection. Each subject had viable virus isolated 3 days after challenge, but only 1 subject developed clinical signs - an elevated rectal temperature, mild sore throat, nasal congestion and obstruction, and an increase in the number of white cells in the blood. In 1966, another human volunteer challenge study with H3N8 equine flu virus was conducted in which 4 of 33 volunteers developed clinical signs. A total of 21 of the volunteers had virus isolated 3 days after inoculation, and 20 developed a 4-fold or greater increases in antibody levels 28 days after inoculation. Another human challenge experiment in 1969, again using equine H3N8 virus, resulted in 13 of 15 volunteers developing signs of illness.Experimental data suggested that the H3N8 virus was not weakened following passage in humans, as it was still capable of infecting and causing illness in horses. The scientists said while there were scattered reports in the news media and historical science writings of horses, dogs, humans, and even cats with influenza-like illnesses, modern documentation of human equine flu virus infection in observational reports were sparse.Mongolia, they noted, has the largest horse-to-man population ratio in the world and has often suffered large flu outbreaks among horses. For instance, a 1983-84 H3N8 outbreak affected an estimated 891 000 horses, causing 176 000 deaths. After anecdotal reports suggested children in Mongolia developed respiratory illnesses after exposure to horses with flu infection, members of the review team conducted a prospective study to investigate human infections with equine flu virus.From 2009 to 2011 they enrolled and followed 439 Mongolian adults, many with occupational exposure to horses, for evidence of equine flu virus infection. In all, 100 developed an influenza-like illness and were investigated with molecular and viral culture studies for influenza. As many as 36 cases (36 percent) were identified as influenza A infections but none had evidence of equine flu virus. However, examination of body fluids upon enrollment, and at 12 and 24 months later, revealed that about 40 participants had detectable microneutralization antibody titers against A/Equine/Mongolia/01/2008(H3N8). However, all such titers were below the level that represented the accepted benchmark for acute infection and evidence was not compelling for recent equine flu virus infection.Soon after, at least 1400 horses were infected with H3N8 equine flu virus during a 2007 outbreak in Australia. Again, the authors conducted a cross-sectional study for equine flu virus infections among 89 people exposed to those sick horses, plus 11 controls. Serum samples were tested for the presence of antibodies against H3N8 equine flu virus. Again, evidence of acute equine flu virus infection was sparse, with only 9 study participants having low titers of antibodies which might easily have been associated with cross-reacting antibody from human influenza virus or vaccines.More recently, the authors reported results from their 2005 cross-sectional study of 94 horse-exposed adults and 34 non-exposed controls from 3 sites in the US state of Iowa. Findings suggested at least a portion of horse-exposed adults had been previously infected with an A/equine/Ohio/2003(H3N8)-like strain.Discussing their findings, the review team said at least 3 H3N8 equine flu virus human challenge studies clearly documented that human infection was possible and that subjects may not show signs of illness. The 1960s observations also showed that human-passaged viruses showed no evidence of attenuation (weakening).""While the observational studies of human equine flu virus infection in Mongolia and Australia were essentially negative, the 2005 cross-sectional study of horse-exposed adults in Iowa was more compelling as observational evidence for human infection with equine flu virus,"" the review team said.They continued: ""During our review we became aware that there have been a number of non-equine influenza A viral segments identified in horses. In searching the Influenza Research Database, we found that genome segments related to influenza A H1N8, H5N1, H7N1 and H9N2 strains have all been detected among samples collected from horses.""Although these identifications seem to be rare, accounting for less than 0.5 percent of all equine influenza virus detections, it may indicate that horses are at least susceptible to more diverse strains of influenza A virus than previously thought. For example, in 2011 a novel H9N2 influenza A virus was detected, isolated, and fully sequenced in a study of horses in Guangxi Province, China. Additionally interesting findings are that equids are not always H3N8 EIV 'dead-end' hosts. H3N8 equine flu viruses have been detected in dogs in the United States, United Kingdom and Australia, in pigs and cats in China, and in a camel in Mongolia.""These findings supported the need for continued surveillance among equids for novel influenza A viruses, they said. However, they cautioned that even with the experimental and observational data supporting evidence that the H3N8 equine flu virus may infect man; the test results in humans may have been confounded by pre-existing antibodies against other influenza strains such as those caused by other human H3 viruses or vaccine.Xie was joined in the review by Benjamin Anderson, Ulziimaa Daramragchaa, Maitsetset Chuluunbaatar and Gregory Gray. They are variously affiliated with the Division of Infectious Diseases and Duke Global Health Institute at Duke University in North Carolina in the United States; the Faculty of Health Service at the Second Military Medical University in Shanghai, China; and the National Center for Zoonotic Diseases in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The reference for the above report is a recently published journal article; this is the full citation:Xie T, Anderson BD, Daramragchaa U, Chuluunbaatar M and Gray GC: A Review of Evidence that Equine Influenza Viruses Are Zoonotic. Pathogens. 2016; 5(3), doi:10.3390/pathogens5030050. Available at: <http://www.mdpi.com/2076-0817/5/3/50>""Abstract: Among scientists, there exist mixed opinions whether equine influenza viruses infect man. In this report, we summarize a 2016 systematic and comprehensive review of the English, Chinese, and Mongolian scientific literature regarding evidence for equine influenza virus infections in man. Searches of PubMed, Web of Knowledge, ProQuest, CNKI, Chongqing VIP Database, Wanfang Data and MongolMed yielded 2831 articles, of which 16 met the inclusion criteria for this review. Considering these 16 publications, there was considerable experimental and observational evidence that at least H3N8 equine influenza viruses have occasionally infected man. In this review we summarize the most salient scientific reports""The authors concluded; ""The historical, observational, and experimental data are compelling in supporting the premise that Equine Influenza Virus (EIV) infections occasionally occur in man. While in recent years, human infections with EIVs have not often been associated with signs of infection, the propensity for influenza A viruses to change makes these viruses worthy of our attention. In particular, should H7N7 EIV strains again emerge, most humans would have little cross-reacting antibody, and the threat to humans might be quite different than that commonly seen today for H3N8. We believe these observations support close surveillance for novel influenza virus emergence among equids"".Indeed, the evolutionary potential of influenza A viruses and their propensity for crossing the species barrier has been well documented in almost all classes of animals. Animal influenza viruses whether avian, swine or equine need to be monitored continuously in order to detect emergence of novel strains that may have epidemic or pandemic potential. - Mod.UBA][In the 1st paragraph I would take exception to the statement ""there is strong evidence for equine influenza virus to infect humans"". There are many influenza viruses. Some may indeed be capable of infecting humans. However, it certainly has not been made much of in the human literature.In the 2nd paragraph the authors' state there is compelling evidence, but the evidence in this article would not be what I would call compelling. In fact according to OIE ""There is little risk to public health from equine influenza. In experimental settings the virus has shown the ability to infect humans, and a few people in contact with infected horses developed antibodies to equine influenza viruses, but no humans exposed to the virus have become ill"" <http://www.oie.int/doc/ged/D14001.PDF>.In the 3rd paragraph the article refers to infection in people. The only scientific papers I could find indicated that those occasional individuals were all part of trials, and not naturally infected. This would mean they were intentionally exposed to what were probably high concentrations of the virus or they were injected with it, which is not the same as a casual infection from a horse.This article provides no evidence of how the authors know this virus has been infecting equines since 1299. I sincerely doubt that laboratory samples have been retained since 1299. I also doubt that a museum specimen would be likely to yield the virus.While I don't doubt that 1872 saw an outbreak of some virus that caused damage to the horses at the time, I am wondering where the evidence is to support that it was an equine influenza. By the authors' own admission recent outbreaks (of equine influenza) have not been associated with spill over to non equid species, which could be translated to mean humans.There is no dispute the human flu pandemic occurred but I have seen no evidence it was related to an equine influenza virus. Furthermore to date, no humans have died from equine influenza, but rather only had antibodies. So the story about the pandemic being from equine influenza, does not seem likely. While those in the 1960's may have had antibodies, it does not prove that it originated from the 1889 pandemic.It should be noted that the authors speak of a challenge study using an injection of the virus. Many animals or people may succumb to a virus that is injected, while inhalation may only produce antibodies without concomitant disease. The fact the Mongolian adults had an antibody titer is not surprising as many exposed individuals can develop a titer without disease. Nevertheless I am hard pressed to believe the presence of antibodies alone indicates fulminate disease. The authors also admit to sparse and low titers following an outbreak of influenza in Australia. The study participants did not develop disease.When the authors' state in their 2005 study that a portion of the horse-exposed adults had been previously infected with an influenza A/equine strain, they do not tell us how they judged infection or it was only antibodies present in these individuals. In fact, the authors admit that their studies in Australia and Mongolia were essentially negative, but persist in calling some people infected. The presence of an antibody indicates an exposure, but not necessarily an infection.While the authors continued there was infection they also admit to cross reactions, which in my mind calls into question their previous statements regarding any possible disease.While any influenza virus may bear watching and studying as changes in the virus may cause other animals or people to be affected, I do not believe that situation has occurred. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/8854>.]
