Prince George Citizen [edited]<http://www.princegeorgecitizen.com/news/local-news/algae-outbreak-strikes-local-lakes-1.2313556>Northern Health has issued an advisory warning of a blue-green algae outbreak in parts of Bednesti-Berman, Nulki and West Lakes.Coming into contact with the algae, either by swimming through it or drinking water containing the substance, can create a range of irritations both externally and internally. The best thing to do is to get out of the water and wash yourself with fresh water.Symptoms, like a rash or sore throat, usually appear within 1 to 3 hours and resolve in 1 to 2 days. If they last longer than a couple of days, seek medical attention by going to your family doctor.Northern Health environmental health officer David Ho said the bloom should last for some time.""In the past, we usually see these blooms come up in August, so this year [2016] has been a little unusual,"" he said. ""They did come quite early, and we expect it to last at least through August 2016.""The blooms can be naturally occurring, but there are things that can contribute to their rise, such as runoff of fertilizers and pesticides. ""Even sometimes malfunctioning septic systems will introduce unwanted nutrients [that feed the blooms],"" said Ho.Northern Health is working with the community associations to see whether steps can be taken to lessen the problem, Ho said. ""For this advisory, we are being proactive and warning users to use their judgment,"" Ho said. ""If you see the green scum floating around, just avoid it."" The algae can also be greenish-brown, brown, or pinkish-red, and often smells musty or grassy.Boiling lake water will not remove the toxins the algae produce and alternate sources of drinking water should also be provided for pets and livestock.Fillets from fish caught in the lakes can be eaten, but consumption of whole fish and trimmings should be limited for both people and pets.More information can be found at <http://www.healthlinkbc.ca/healthfiles/hfile47.stm> or by calling Northern Health's environmental health office.[Byline: Mark Nielsen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Blue-green algae, (also known as cyanobacteria), are bacteria that grow in shallow, slow moving or still water. This includes fresh water lakes, ponds or wetlands. Blue-green algae can range in colour from olive-green to red.What are blue-green algae blooms?When the amount of blue-green algae increases a lot, a large, dense mass will form. This mass is called a bloom. Blooms cover the surface of the water and can look like thick pea soup, often blue-green in colour. However, not all blooms are easy to see. Toxins can still be in the water even if you cannot see the blooms.Blue-green algae blooms occur naturally. Yet, water bodies enriched with nutrients from human activities such as municipal, industrial or agricultural sources are much more likely to have blooms.Are these blooms poisonous?Some blue-green algae blooms can produce chemicals that are poisonous if swallowed by people, pets, or livestock. Other blooms can have no noticeable effect on pets or livestock.There are 2 types of toxins or poisons that can be produced by blue-green algae:- Neurotoxins: Affect the nervous and respiratory systems and can cause muscle tremors, stupor, staggering, rapid paralysis, breathing problems and, in extreme cases, death (mostly observed in livestock). Pets and livestock that die from this are usually found close to the body of water where they drank from.- Hepatotoxins: Affect the liver and can take days before symptoms appear after drinking affected water. Pets or livestock that get sick after drinking enough of this toxin may show jaundice (yellowing of the white of the eye, and sensitivity to sunlight).How could I be exposed to blue-green algae?You can be exposed to blue-green algae by drinking water that has blue-green algae in it, or by doing recreational activities such as swimming, boating or waterskiing in water with blue-green algae.During a severe blue-green algae bloom, water looks bad, and may also smell bad. Adults or older children will likely not drink this water. However, younger children may be less careful, or unaware of the dangers of drinking water with blue-green algae blooms.What are the symptoms of exposure to blue-green algae?Symptoms from drinking water that contain blue-green algae can include: headaches, nausea, fever, sore throat, dizziness, stomach cramps, diarrhea, abdominal pain, vomiting, muscle aches, mouth ulcers, and blistering of the lips. Symptoms from swimming and other recreational water activities in contaminated water can include skin rashes and irritated ears and eyes.If you have been exposed to blue-green algae toxins and have any of these symptoms, rinse off your body and see your health care provider right away.How are pets and livestock exposed to blue-green algae?Pets and livestock with no other source of drinking water may be poisoned by drinking contaminated water with blue-green algae. To reduce risk to livestock, do not allow rainwater or other surface runoff to flow through livestock areas.How long does a bloom last?Blooms may last for weeks, months, or possibly all year. If you are unsure about the quality of the water, contact your local Ministry of Environment regional office.How can I prevent illness from blue-green algae?To prevent illness from blue-green algae make sure to:- Follow the advisories of your local Government, local Health Authority, and Ministries.- Never drink untreated water from lakes, ponds or wetlands. Boiling water does not remove blue-green algae from the water.- Never wade, swim or bathe in water with visible blooms.- Never cook, wash dishes, or do laundry in water heavily contaminated with blue-green algae.- Never let pets or livestock into the water if there are blue-green algae, and provide them with other sources of drinking water.- In addition to possible health risks from bluegreen algae, you may get sick from other illnesses spread by drinking untreated water.This comment has been extracted from: <http://www.healthlinkbc.ca/healthfiles/hfile47.stm>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/264>.]
