CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy) News [edited]<http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2016/07/contrary-dengue-vaccine-response-hints-possible-problems-zika>""It's happened. We have a vaccine that enhances dengue,"" said Scott B Halstead, MD, talking about a phenomenon whereby the dengue vaccine sets up dengue-naÌøve recipients for severe disease.Halstead, the leading figure in dengue research in the past 50 years, is referring to CYD-TDV (Dengvaxia, Sanofi Pasteur), the 1st dengue vaccine approved by the World Health Organization in April [2016], and now licensed for use in 5 countries. When Halstead, a former senior advisor of the Dengue Vaccine Initiative and the founder of Children's Vaccine Initiative, first saw the 3-year results of the vaccine published in the New England Journal of Medicine last summer [2015], he immediately saw a problem in the data.""It's clear as the nose on my face: vaccine recipients less than 5 years old had 5-7 times more rates of hospitalizations for severe dengue virus than placebo controls.""ADE primes subjects for severe illnessHalstead is describing a problem dengue researchers feared for years; the vaccine appears to cause ADE, or antibody-dependent enhancement. In dengue ADE, which Halstead first identified, infection with one of the 4 strains of the virus produces antibodies to that strain and cross-reactive antibodies to the other dengue strains.""Over time, you make and keep protective levels of antibody from the initial infection, but you lose the cross-reactive antibodies,"" said Halstead. ""That allows a 2nd dengue infection to cause severe illness, including dengue hemorrhagic fever.""Halstead said 2 examples illustrate dengue ADE in action: in 1977, Cubans, a dengue-naÌøve population, were infected with dengue 1. Nearly 20 years later, in 1997, dengue 2 came to the city of Santiago, and hospital rates were 8-fold higher in patients previously infected with dengue 1.""The longer interval [between infection with different dengue strains], the more severe the disease,"" said Hallstead.A similar phenomenon is seen in mothers who've had 2 or more dengue infections. They pass some cross-reactive antibodies to their babies, but no T cells, which are important in immune response. In turn, their children can react much worse to dengue virus.What Halstead saw in Sanofi's data was the vaccine acting as an initial viral exposure in seronegative subjects (those with low antibody levels in the blood), almost like a mother and baby, leading to ADE in the years following immunization.""The vaccine is even worse than an infection, because it has all different antibodies that wane over time, and the T cells from yellow fever,"" Halstead said.Halstead and Philip K Russell, MD, PhD, the former director of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and commander of the US Army Medical Research and Development Command, as well as founding president and chairman of the Sabin Vaccine Institute, decided to take their findings and publish an article in Vaccine in February 2016 [see reference below].Using Sanofi Pasteur's data from the phase 3 clinical trials of Dengvaxia, which involved more than 35 000 children in 10 dengue-endemic countries, they showed that, during year 3 of the trial, among children ages 5 years or younger, 54.2 percent of whom were seronegative on enrollment, the dengue hospitalization rate was significantly higher among vaccinees than controls. The rate was 0.99 percent for the former (20 of 2029) and 0.2 percent for the latter (2 of 1005), a relative risk of 4.95, which translates into a 5-fold risk of hospitalization.According to Russell, Sanofi Pasteur has failed to directly address this phenomenon. ""What the company has done is say, 'Well, we only vaccinate kids over the age 9,' "" said Russell. ""But age is only a surrogate here for being dengue naÌøve. They need to directly address ADE in phase 4 studies.""In response to a query about the problem, Susan H Watkins, senior director of communications with Sanofi Pasteur, said in an e-mail that ADE cannot be inferred from the data. ""No differences in clinical picture or viremia have been observed between vaccinees and controls or between the active and hospital phase. Additional investigations to assess the immunological profile of hospitalized/severe dengue cases (cytokines/chemokines and growth factors) still showed no differences irrespective of phase and age group,"" she said.Russell isn't convinced. ""In ADE we wouldn't expect to have different clinical presentations or viremia. The fact is they haven't disproved the ADE hypothesis or come up with any good explanation why you have up to relative risk of 5 or 6 [for hospitalization of seronegative children].""Furthermore, Russell said the serologic status at enrollment of hospitalized children was collected in only 8-19 percent of subjects, which offers an incomplete picture. ""They are trying hard [to ignore this,] because they have USD 2 billion invested in this vaccine,"" Russell said.Vincent Racaniello, PhD, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Columbia University in New York City, said he doesn't think Halstead and Russell's article can prove ADE, but it is consistent with such an interpretation.""I can understand why Sanofi, which has invested huge sums in developing CYD, wants to deny that the vaccine causes ADE,"" said Racaniello. ""However, it would be irresponsible to simply deny that ADE is taking place and go on to vaccinate all people over 9 years of age.""...Halstead is worried about what he sees in Dengvaxia. He said the Philippines just bought 1 million doses of the vaccine, with intentions to begin inoculating 9-year-olds across the country. That could mean thousands of children could be affected by dengue ADE.""I don't understand why there seems to be some sort of silent majority on this,"" said Halstead. ""Seronegatives are going to be sensitized to dengue virus for the rest of their lives, and it's not going to stop at hospitalizations. ""Someone is going to die.""[Byline: Stephanie Soucheray][Reference----------Halstead SB, Russell PK: Protective and immunological behavior of chimeric yellow fever dengue vaccine. Vaccine 2016; 34(14): 1643-7; abstract available at <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264410X16001304>].--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall
