Daily Mail [edited]<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3722300/Mumps-outbreak-NYC-two-dozen-adults-20s-30s-diagnosed-infection.html>Mumps is [a virus] that causes an infection of the salivary gland, preventable by MMR [measles, mumps, rubella] vaccine. The highly infectious virus is spread by saliva on cups, cutlery, plates, etc. Many do not experience symptoms but mumps can be devastating.More than 2 dozen adults have contracted mumps in New York City, health officials fear. There are at least 18 people in their 20s and 30s currently being treated for the highly infectious virus in Long Beach -- and medics believe there are as many as 25.Since widespread implementation of the MMR jab, it is now barely reported. The sudden outbreak has shocked the medical community, since 97 per cent of New Yorkers have received the mumps, measles, and rubella (MMR) vaccine. It sparks fears that there may be a new strain of the [virus].Residents on Long Island [New York] have been warned to wash all glasses, plates, and cutlery in a hot dishwasher to blitz the highly infectious virus, which is spread through saliva.And anyone who thinks they may have symptoms should self-quarantine for at least 5 days and seek medical help.'If you know you're sick please stay home and don't transmit this,' Nassau County Health Commissioner, Dr Lawrence Eisenstein, said. 'It is highly contagious, and even those who were vaccinated can get mumps.'He said anyone who has only received one MMR jab should consider getting a top-up booster to protect against mumps.Typically, symptoms include puffy cheeks, swollen glands, headaches, a fever, chills, fatigue, muscle aches, and a lack of appetite. Sufferers have described feeling pain in their stomach, neck, pelvis, and testicles. Sufferers have lost their hearing, become infertile, and had swollen brains. Some people do not experience any symptoms.A mumps infection can also travel to and infect other parts of the body. When this occurs it often causes swelling and discomfort in the affected area.One of those developments is orchitis, [an inflammation of one or both testicles, which affects around 25 per cent of post-pubescent males. Roughly half the time it also causes the affected testicle to shrink in size.Mumps can also lead to viral meningitis, acute pancreatitis, and oophoritis (swelling of one or both ovaries). In very rare cases (around 0.1 per cent) mumps can cause encephalitis, a life-threatening inflammation of the brain. Symptoms of encephalitis include flu-like symptoms, headache, confusion, dizziness, change in personality, change in behavior, drowsiness, disorientation, seizures, and loss of consciousness.Anyone suffering these symptoms after contracting mumps should call 911 immediately. This condition requires emergency treatment in a hospital's intensive care unit (ICU).[Byline: Mia De Graaf]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Mumps is a viral illness caused by a _Rubulavirus_, a member of the _paramyxovirus_ family. These cases of mumps may be a consequence of unvaccinated individuals becoming infected, infection of immunized individuals with a mutated strain of the virus that is escaping antibody to the virus, or more likely, waning antibody.Protective levels of antibodies induced by the MMR vaccine were first suggested to be lifelong; however, the levels of measles, mumps, or rubella antibodies have been shown to decline over time, faster after vaccinations than when naturally acquired. ...This was shown to happen especially when the incidence of measles, mumps, and rubella [in the population] became very low ... and natural diseases did not boost the once-gained antibody levels.A study conducted in Finland demonstrated that 15 years after the 2nd dose of the MMR vaccine, the rate of seropositivity in initially seronegative vaccinees was 95 percent, 74 percent, and 100 percent for measles, mumps, and rubella, respectively. However, the geometric mean levels of antibodies against all 3 viruses declined significantly from the levels achieved after the 2nd MMR dose, although with a slower rate of decline during the last 7 years. ...A relatively large number of [the Finnish] vaccinees have become seronegative to mumps during the follow-up period. The proportion of low-level (equivocal) antibodies against mumps was higher than for measles or rubella. However, the EIA [enzyme immunoassay] used may have influenced the mumps seropositivity rate, because it is known to have a lower sensitivity than the neutralization test and tends to overestimate equivocal and negative results. In addition, the mumps component of the trivalent MMR vaccine seems to be the weakest of the 3 antigens in inducing humoral immunity. At any rate, our recent study shows that cellular immunity to mumps persists at least 21 years after the first MMR vaccination and is not dependent on antibody status.Excerpted and edited from Davidkin I et al: Persistence of measles, mumps, and rubella antibodies in an MMR-vaccinated cohort: a 20-year follow-up. J Infect Dis. 2008; 197(7): 950-6. doi: 10.1086/528993; <http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/content/197/7/950.long>.Also see discussion of measles, mumps, rubella vaccine in previous ProMED-mail posts.A map of New York, USA can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/234>. - Mod.LK]
