Rock Springs Rocket Miner [edited]<http://wyomingbusinessreport.com/tularemia-case-prompts-warning/>With the recent report of a man in Sweetwater County contracting tularemia, Sweetwater County Health Officer Jean Stachon asks people to be aware and take precautions. ""This is the season for tularemia and other diseases like giardia,"" Stachon said. ""The rule of thumb is don't take a rabbit before it freezes.""Tularemia can be a serious disease and, in rare cases, deadly, according to the Wyoming Department of Health. Also known as rabbit fever or deer fly fever, it frequently affects rabbits, hares and rodents and has been associated with rabbit and rodent die-offs. People may acquire tularemia when bitten by infected ticks, deer flies or horse flies. It can also be transmitted by handling infected animals, or through ingestion or contact with untreated, contaminated water or insufficiently cooked meat.Symptoms of tularemia can include fever, swollen and painful lymph glands, inflamed eyes, sore throat, mouth sores, skin ulcers and diarrhea. If the bacteria are inhaled, symptoms can include sudden onset of fever, chills, headache, muscle aches, joint pain, dry cough and progressive weakness and pneumonia. Stachon said people should be aware of the symptoms; anyone who suspects their illness may be tularemia should review their activities and where they have been recreating. People recreating outdoors should be aware and take precautions, she added.Though life-threatening if not treated, tularemia responds quickly to antimicrobials, and because the symptoms mimic other illnesses, people are encouraged to tell their doctor if any tularemia exposure is possible, according to the state health department.[Byline: Ann Jantz]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Tularemia is a classic zoonosis, capable of being transmitted by aerosol, direct contact, ingestion, or arthropods. Inhalation of aerosolized organisms (as in the laboratory or as an airborne agent in an act of bioterrorism) can produce a pneumonic form. Direct contact with or ingestion of infected carcasses of wild animals (such as cottontail rabbits) can produce the ulceroglandular, oculoglandular, oropharyngeal (local lesion with regional inflammation of a lymph node), or typhoidal form. Immersion in or ingestion of contaminated water can result in infection in aquatic animals. Ticks can maintain infection transstadially and transovarially. Transstadial transmission occurs when a pathogen remains with the vector from one life stage (""stadium"") to the next. Transovarial or transovarian transmission occurs in certain arthropod vectors as they transmit disease-causing bacteria from parent arthropod to offspring arthropod, which makes them an efficient reservoir as well as a vector. Recognized vectors in the USA include _Dermacentor andersoni_ (wood tick), _Amblyomma americanum_ (lone star tick), _Dermacentor variabilis_ (dog tick), and _Chrysops discalis_ (deer fly).The infection does not spread from person to person, essentially in contradiction to another Category A bioterrorism agent, _Yersinia pestis_, in which the pneumonic form can easily be transmitted._F. tularensis_ infection can present in a variety of ways depending on the route of acquisition. Even before the antimicrobial era, pneumonia due to inhalation of _Francisella tularensis_ seemed to account for most of the deaths related to the infection (1). A good review of the subject written by Thomas and Schaffner can be found in reference 2.References:1. Foshay L: Cause of death in tularemia. Arch Intern Med. 1937;60: 22-38.2. Thomas LD, Schaffner W: Tularemia pneumonia. Infect Dis N Am 2010;24: 43-55. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/251>.]
