Los Angeles Times [edited]<http://www.latimes.com/world/la-fg-yellow-fever-vaccines-disppear-20160804-snap-story.html>As a yellow fever outbreak in central Africa exploded, 1 million vaccines disappeared in Angola. Thousands more vaccinations were delayed when accompanying syringes got waylaid. Ice packs to keep the shots potent went missing. And while the epidemic of the hemorrhagic fever spilled across international borders, a senior outbreak expert at the World Health Organization acknowledged their response had ""lagged"" for months.Some health officials now estimate they will be short about 22 million vaccines [doses] amid the worst yellow fever outbreak in decades.From Angola, the virus has since spread to [DR] Congo, with a total of 5000 suspect cases and more than 450 deaths. The potential for the outbreak to be exported elsewhere remains high, since the disease is spreading largely unchecked in the Congolese capital of Kinshasa, a city of more than 10 million with strong international links.""We could have prevented this from happening,"" said Amanda McClelland, a senior emergency official at the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, also known as the IFRC. Unlike Ebola, there is a vaccine to stop yellow fever from spiraling out of control, and global agencies should have reacted faster, McClelland said. The vaccine takes effect about 10 days after it is administered.The mostly mosquito-spread virus was largely wiped out from the West following the development of 2 vaccines in the 1930s, but still sparks epidemics in Africa and Latin America. On [12 Feb 2016], WHO announced an outbreak of yellow fever in the Angolan capital of Luanda. In a bid to snuff out the disease, WHO and partners quickly dispatched more than 6 million doses -- the equivalent of the entire global emergency supply.To ensure the vaccines reached those who needed them, WHO and partners requested a detailed explanation of their use. But Angola failed to account for more than 1 million doses, internal emails between WHO and its colleagues show.""How can this happen in a situation of (vaccine) shortage?"" WHO's Sergio Yactayo wrote to his colleagues at UNICEF, Doctors Without Borders, IFRC, and WHO. He speculated that the shots had probably been taken by local politicians, the military, or resold on the private market.In an emailed statement this week [week of 1 Aug 2016], WHO and partners said the million missing doses were ""not unexpected"" in such a mass vaccination campaign. But Angolan officials disputed that any vaccines were missing at all. ""There has been no diversion (of the vaccines) whatsoever,"" said Luis Gomes Sambo, the country's health minister. He said the government has careful accounting of where and when the shots were administered and nothing has disappeared.As the disease tore through Angola and Congo in the spring [2016], [there were] a series of avoidable mistakes that stalled control efforts, including sending vaccines without syringes.""Sending the vaccines without the vaccination material is 'useless',"" WHO's Angola representative Hernando Agudelo complained to his colleagues in a May [2016] email.In Congo, WHO logistician Guillaume Queyras described a ""quite alarming"" situation where workers were unable to guarantee that vaccines were being kept at the right temperature to preserve their effectiveness.With competing vaccine requests from worried countries, experts began to consider diluting the shot [not diluting, rather administering 1/5 the usual volume as a fractional dose. - Mod.TY]About one month later, an internal memo to WHO Director-General Dr Margaret Chan relayed more alarming news: Congo's only yellow fever laboratory in Kinshasa had halted operations 2 weeks earlier, leaving WHO unable to track where yellow fever was spreading in the country.Facing pressure from Doctors Without Borders, Chan wrote directly to its International President, Dr Joanne Liu. In a [16 Jul 2016] message, Chan listed 5 measures WHO had taken to restart the Kinshasa facility. But despite her reassurances, the yellow fever lab was still shuttered in late July [2016].Laboratory director Dr Jean-Jacques Muyembe Tamfum, said [Mon 1 Aug 2016] that there was a backlog of 300 untested samples, explaining that diagnostic materials shipped to the lab had been mistakenly returned.With limited yellow fever vaccines in the emergency stockpile, WHO is now recommending doses be diluted [not diluted; dose volume reduced. - Mod.TY], even though a draft document in May [2016] concluded that doing so ""should be forgotten because of the programmatic and safety concerns.""In a press release, WHO concluded that partial doses, which use 1/5 of the standard vaccine dose, could indeed be ""a safe and effective option.""[Byline: Maria Cheng, Krista Larson]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[One wonders from this report if the areas of responsibility and authority between the WHO and the Angola and DR Congo Ministries of Health were not clearly defined during this outbreak. Did 1 million doses of vaccine disappear? The report above indicates that they did. Angolan officials state that they did not, and all are accounted for. If they were, in fact, diverted from the stock, that raises concern that they may not have been maintained under cold chain conditions, have lost their efficacy, and individuals vaccinated with them would not be protected. The lack of syringes and return of the reagents that caused the Kinshasa laboratory to be unavailable for YF diagnosis indicate that there have been serious logistical problems. The lack of vaccine is easier to understand. The major problem with the traditional yellow fever vaccine is not its efficacy but rather the slow and laborious process that its manufacture requires. This vaccine is made in specific pathogen-free embryonated eggs. The availability of eggs is a limiting factor.An extensive vaccination campaign is scheduled for August 2016, when a new lot of vaccine arrives. One hopes that this new shipment of vaccine is both timely and adequate to provide at least 80 percent coverage in areas of current transmission and of further risk. Administration of the 1/5 fractional dose would extend coverage.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the locations of the African countries mentioned can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3948>. - Mod.TY]******[2] WHO situation reportDate: Fri 5 Aug 2016Source: WHO, Emergencies, Yellow Fever [edited] <http://www.who.int/emergencies/yellow-fever/situation-reports/5-august-2016/en/>A yellow fever outbreak was detected in Luanda, Angola late in December 2015. The 1st cases were confirmed by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa on 19 Jan 2016 and by the Institut Pasteur Dakar (IP-D) on 20 Jan [2016]. Subsequently, a rapid increase in the number of cases has been observed.Summary-------Angola: 3818 suspected casesIn Angola, as of 28 Jul 2016 a total of 3818 suspected cases have been reported, of which 879 are laboratory confirmed. The total number of reported deaths is 369, of which 119 were reported among confirmed cases. Suspected cases have been reported in all 18 provinces and confirmed cases have been reported in 16 of 18 provinces and 80 of 126 reporting districts.Mass reactive vaccination campaigns that first began in Luanda have expanded to cover most of the other affected parts of Angola and recently have focused on border areas with the Democratic Republic of The Congo (DRC). The next vaccination phase targeting 3 million people in 18 districts is expected to start on 16 Aug [2016].Democratic Republic of the Congo: 2051 suspected casesThe recent technical difficulties at the national laboratory in DRC have been resolved and laboratory analysis of backlog samples is ongoing. As of [27 Jul 2016], 8 patients have tested positive among 700 samples tested and investigations are ongoing to collect additional information. Since the beginning of the outbreak, DRC has reported (as of [27 Jul 2016]) a total of 2051 suspected cases including 76 confirmed cases and 95 reported deaths. Cases have been reported in 22 Health Zones in 5 of 26 provinces. Of the 76 confirmed cases, 67 are reported as imported from Angola, 2 are sylvatic (not related to the outbreak), and 7 are autochthonous. The number of suspect cases is increasing in Kinshasa, Kongo Central, Kwango, Tshuapa, and Lualaba provinces in the week ending 16 Jul [2016].In DRC, reactive vaccination campaigns started on [20 Jul 2016] and finished on [29 Jul 2016] in Kisenso Health Zone in Kinshasa province and in Kahemba, Kajiji, and Kisandji Health Zones in Kwango province. Preparations are ongoing for the preventive vaccination campaigns planned to begin at end of August [2016] in 32 Health Zones in Kinshasa province and 15 Health Zones in border areas with Angola.Fractional dosing [1/5 normal dose volume] will be implemented in a pre-emptive mass vaccination campaign in DRC in Kinshasa. VaccinationAs of 4 Aug 2016, 21.2 million vaccine doses have been approved for Angola, 11.5 million for DRC and 0.8 million in Uganda.The number of vaccines currently available for the emergency response is 5.1 million through the ICG [International Coordinating Group] and WHO. The amount of doses already allocated to respond to the outbreak is not included in this number.Risk assessment---------------The outbreak in Angola is receding and no confirmed case has been reported in the country during July (as of [28 Jul 2016]). However, a high level of vigilance needs to be maintained throughout the country, and the pre-emptive mass vaccination campaign will be implemented as plannedIn DRC, there is a need for heightened vigilance as the outbreak has spread to new Health Zones in the [5] affected provinces. Further cases are expected to be confirmed in the next days or weeks due to the backlog at the national laboratory which stemmed from technical issues that are now resolved. The outbreak might spread to other provinces as more suspected cases have been reported in [Kinshasa, Kongo Central, Kwango, Tshuapa,] Lualaba, and Kasai provinces. Given the presence and activity of the vector _Aedes_ in the country and low immunity of the population, the outbreak might extend to other provinces.Transmission of yellow fever in Angola and DRC is mainly concentrated in cities; however, there is a high risk of spread and local transmission to other provinces, especially in DRC where the vaccinated population is much lower.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[No YF cases reported in July 2016 in Angola is good news. One hopes that surveillance there is intensified to pick up any new cases and prevent a flare up of the outbreak.The situation in the DR Congo remains of concern. Fortunately, the YF diagnostic laboratory has resumed testing. The number of suspected and confirmed cases is rising, although the increase in the number of locally acquired cases reported remains small. Initiation of the large vaccination campaign to begin at the end of August 2016 will be critical to keep the outbreak from expanding. - Mod.TY]
