Jerusalem on line [edited]<http://www.jerusalemonline.com/news/in-israel/health-and-environment/unilever-cereal-boxes-found-to-be-infected-with-salmonella-22787>Unilever Israel said 240 salmonella-tainted cereal boxes have been sold in stores at the Petah Tikvah area despite a widespread recall and cannot be accounted for.The company originally stated that none of the contaminated boxes had ever reached the shelves, but after a customer called the Unilever hotline and said she had purchased a box of cornflakes with dates matching the ones warned about, Unilever discovered that hundreds of these boxes had been sold in central Israel, mainly in supermarkets popular among the religious community.Rachel from Petah Tikvah, the costumer who called the company, told Channel 2 News, ""On Wednesday evening, my daughter told me there was a warning on Facebook about certain dates on cereal boxes. I checked and saw that our box had the exact same dates printed on it.""""3/4ths of that box has already been eaten,"" she added. ""I told my kids to stop eating from it. They all feel fine, thank God.""The CEO of Unilever said in a statement, ""We deeply apologize for the recent occurrences. You've always trusted us, and we want to reemphasize our commitment to provide you with the best-quality products under complete transparency.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Fri 5 Aug 2016Source: Haaretz [edited]<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.735441>The Health Ministry is considering revoking the manufacturing license of Unilever Israel over its handling of the recent outbreak of salmonella contamination in several of its breakfast cereal brands.""Unilever failed to act responsibly,"" Health Minister Yaakov Litzman told a radio interviewer on Friday [5 Aug 2016]. ""We take the fact that it lied to the public and the Health Ministry very seriously."" Litzman added that a ministerial team was investigating the affair, which, he said, ""posed a real danger to public safety.""Unilever informed the ministry on Thursday [4 Aug 2016] that a consignment of 240 units of potentially contaminated boxes had been shipped from the factory to a branch of the Haredi supermarket chain Yesh Hesed in Be'erot Yitzhak. That, despite the firm's repeated declarations in recent days that no products suspected of contamination had left the factory. In response to the information about potentially contaminated boxes of cereal reaching a public outlet, the Health Ministry on Thursday [4 Aug 2016] created a professional team to investigate the outbreak. The team is headed by Prof. Itamar Grotto, the head of Public Health Services at the ministry. The ministry said the team will visit the Unilever factory early next week to ""look into its operations."" In addition, the ministry said that it was ""considering using the legal options that we have.""The ministry announced on Friday [5 Aug 2016] that no increase in the incidence of salmonella in Israel had been recorded. Nevertheless, it said that it was ""continuing to track the incidence of salmonella, following the detection of the bacterium by the ministry's central laboratory.""People infected with salmonella often have no symptoms. Others develop diarrhea, fever and abdominal cramps, typically within 8 to 72 hours after ingesting the bacterium. Most healthy people recover within a few days without specific treatment, but life-threatening complications can result if the infection spreads beyond the intestines.Unilever Israel CEO Anat Gabriel apologized to consumers for the salmonella outbreak on Friday [5 Aug 2016].[Byline: Ido Efrati] --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Several claims by consumers complaining about food poisoning they attribute to the consumption of cereals from the suspected batches have been published by the media and social networks during the week-end. The validity of such claims deserves to be assessed by comparing the results of the serotyping and genotyping of the salmonella contaminant in the cereals and in specimens from the patients. Information on the serotype involved will be useful.During a large-scale food-borne salmonellosis epidemic in Israel from October 1994-February 1995, the identity of the causative agent was determined in a London-based Laboratory of Enteric Pathogens. Following the detection of salmonellosis cases in about 30 children in a Jewish neighborhood in northern London, it was found that all those affected had consumed a kosher savory snack imported into the UK from Israel. The bacterium in specimens from the affected patients was found to be _Salmonella agona_, phage-type 15. A similar bacterium was identified in 28 out of 32 bags of the imported snack. Final profiling of the isolates from both sources, by the application of Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis, led to the definite conclusion that the imported snack was the disease causative agent.The information from London was followed by a large-scale surveillance in Israel and an epidemiological investigation, unravelling the epidemiology of a major _Salmonella agona_ epidemic going on throughout the country during the same period.  It was found, indirectly, that the snack involved in the event in the UK was causing the large-scale event in Israel, similarly affecting mainly children. According to Israel's Ministry of Health, the incidence rate of this epidemic was 147.5 per 100,000; in fact, Israel's largest ever salmonellosis epidemic. The source of initial contamination in the production line of the plant was not discovered; the assumption was that the bacterium was introduced by imported peanut butter, incorporated into the (popular) snack. The plant/company which were involved in the 1994/5 event are not the same as the ones involved in the 2016 event.For further details on the said event and its international ramifications, see references below.References1. Threlfall, EL, Hampton, MD, Ward LR & Rowe B. Application of Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis to an International Outbreak of _Salmonella agona_. Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 2, No. 2 (April-June 1996), 1312. Killalea D, Ward L, de Lavois J, Majiid F, Stuart JM, Wall PG, Susman M, et al. International epidemiological and microbiological study of outbreak of _Salmonella agona_ infection from a ready to eat savoury snack. I. England and Wales and the United States. BMJ 1996;313:1105-7.3. Shohat T, Green MS, Merom D, Gill ON, Reisfeld A, Matas A, et al. International epidemiological and microbiological study of outbreak of _Salmonella agona_ infection from a ready to eat savoury snack. II. Israel. BMJ 1996;313:1107-9. - Mod.ASA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/90>.]
