Digital Journal [edited]<http://www.digitaljournal.com/life/food/this-year-s-cyclospora-outbreak-in-texas-likely-food-borne/article/471816>For the 3rd year in a row, the United States is experiencing an outbreak of the parasitic infection, cyclosporiasis.In Texas, as of Thursday [4 Aug 2016], 72 cases have been confirmed. In an emailed statement sent to Outbreak News Today on Friday from Texas Department of State Health Services Press Officer Christine Mann, she said that of the 72 cases reported thus far, 55 have occurred in just the last month.The rapid rise in the number of cases of the parasitic infection prompted the Texas Department of Health to issue a health advisory asking for help from healthcare providers and warning the public that fresh produce is a likely source of the infection.""Rapid reporting to public health, enabling prompt investigation to identify possible common exposures, is essential to preventing additional cases of cyclosporiasis this year [2016],"" reads the advisory, which also recommends a number of diagnostic tests.""Diagnosis of cyclosporiasis requires submission of stool specimens for 'Ova and Parasite' testing with additional specific orders for Cyclospora identification. A single negative stool specimen does not exclude the diagnosis; 3 specimens are optimal,"" according to the advisory.A local NBC affiliate writes the food-borne illness has been identified in 4 counties in North Texas, including Dallas, Tarrant, Collin and Denton counties. Six of the cases were apparently acquired while the victims were out of state.In the past few years, the U.S. has seen an increase in the number of cyclospora illnesses in the summer months, with past outbreaks linked to fresh produce.""Past outbreaks in the U.S. have been associated with consumption of imported fresh produce, including fresh cilantro, pre-packaged salad mix, raspberries, basil, snow peas and mesclun lettuce,"" the state health department reported.The 2015-2016 cyclospora outbreak was determined to have come from fresh cilantro imported from Pueblo, Mexico. Since the summer of 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has instituted a ban of fresh produce from the Puebla region from April through August.The cyclospora parasite is acquired by eating something that has been contaminated with feces from a person infected with the parasite. The parasite attacks the small intestine, producing a watery diarrhea that is sometimes explosive. Other symptoms may include everything from nausea and vomiting to fatigue and fever. If left untreated, the symptoms can linger for months.[Byline: Karen Graham]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Previous outbreaks of _Cyclospora  cayetanensis_ in the US and Canada, as pointed out in the newswire, have been attributed to contaminated lettuces and greens imported from Mexico. This report comes at the same time as the UK health authorities have reported an outbreak in a British tourist returning from Mexico (See ProMED postings below).As far as we know, there is no animal reservoir for _Cyclospora  cayetanensis_, and the lettuces and greens are contaminated because human fecal material is used as a fertilizer. Thus, to stop the outbreak and to prevent further ones, the producer of these products must be certified not to use human waste in production. - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/245>.]
