The Courier-Journal, CDC report [edited]<http://www.courier-journal.com/story/life/wellness/health/2016/08/05/hepatitis-skyrockets-ky-women-drugs-blamed/87949710/>Hepatitis skyrockets in Kentucky women, drugs blamed----------------------------------------------------Widespread drug abuse led hepatitis C diagnoses among young women to rise nearly 10 times faster in Kentucky than nationally in recent years, while the proportion of babies born to infected moms surged to 1 in 63. These alarming new statistics come from a recent study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that reveals some of the ways shooting up heroin and painkillers endangers the next generation.""Kentucky is experiencing the ravages of a hepatitis C epidemic that has been going on for years now,"" said Dr John Ward, director of CDC's Division of Viral Hepatitis and a senior author on the study. ""And the state is not alone in having a large epidemic of hepatitis C,"" an infectious, viral liver disease. ""We are concerned other states have this problem, too.""Researchers analyzed commercial laboratory data from Quest Diagnostics, information from Kentucky state health officials and national birth certificate data for the years 2011-2014. They found hepatitis C detection among women of childbearing age rose 213 per cent in Kentucky, from 275 to 862 per 100 000; compared with 22 per cent nationally, or 139 to 169 per 100 000. During those same years, Kentucky's health department received reports of 777 pregnant women testing positive for antibodies against hepatitis C.Meanwhile, the proportion of babies born to women with hepatitis C in Kentucky rose 124 per cent, from 1 in 142 to 1 in 63, which Ward called ""very troubling and disturbing and alarming."" The national increase was 68 per cent, from 1 in 536 to 1 in 308.""The numbers speak for themselves,"" said Dr Ardis Hoven, an infectious disease consultant for the Kentucky Department for Public Health and former president of the American Medical Association. ""If you look at the risk factors, you see IV drug use is the main one,"" although tattoos and multiple sex partners also put people at risk. ""...The study shines a light on a significant issue.""Other recent research also points to a growing problem with drug-fueled diseases in the region. One CDC report showed that 220 US counties are at high risk for a rapid spread of hepatitis C and HIV among drug users -- and 54 of them are in Kentucky. Another study found the rate of new hepatitis C cases among people 30 and younger more than tripled from 2006-2012 in Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.In the latest year for which statistics are available, Kentucky had the highest rate of acute hepatitis C infections in the nation -- 4 per 100 000 people in 2014, compared with a national average of 0.7 per 100 000 people.Hepatitis C is also a growing problem in Southern Indiana, where that state's worst-ever HIV outbreak has stricken 203 people. Dr William Cooke, the lone physician in Austin, Indiana, said nearly 600 people were found to have hepatitis C during the outbreak, which was mostly tied to injecting the painkiller Opana (oxymorphone).Realizing the threat to children, Kentucky officials in 2015 began requiring doctors to report all hepatitis C infected pregnant women and children up to age 5, as well as babies born to infected women. Beginning in the fall of 2016, Kentucky plans to require reporting of all hepatitis C lab test results, positive or negative. Ward praised these efforts.Although hepatitis testing isn't mandatory in the state, Hoven said she strongly recommends all pregnant women be tested and everyone get educated about the disease. She also said Kentucky needs more needle exchanges, where addicts can trade dirty needles for clean ones, and more drug treatment to help people kick their addictions. ""Clearly, we need access to more providers of care,"" she said. ""We will continue to work on this.""Doctors agreed the stakes are high. If girls and women 15 to 44 years old contract hepatitis C, the virus can fester inside them for decades. Up to 70 per cent of hepatitis C patients will go on to develop chronic liver disease, CDC says, with up to 20 per cent developing cirrhosis of the liver and up to 5 per cent dying of cirrhosis or liver cancer. Plus, nearly 6 per cent of babies born to women with hepatitis C contract the disease from their mothers. Some children ""clear it on their own"", Hoven said, but others remain infected and are at risk for severe liver disease. ""If we help people before they get pregnant,"" Cooke said, ""we can prevent this.""New, high-priced hepatitis C drugs can actually cure the disease -- although they can't be used in children and Cooke said many patients have a hard time getting their insurance to pay for them. But when infected young women get such medicines before getting pregnant, doctors said they and their future babies can benefit.CDC researchers said their findings underscore the importance of preventing hepatitis C, identifying people at risk and testing them so that they can get into treatment quickly if they're infected. Such measures are crucial, they said, as the scourge of painkiller and heroin abuse continues to grow. Federal statistics show that every day, 3900 Americans begin abusing prescription opioids, 580 start using heroin, and 78 die from an opioid overdose.While Kentucky may stand out in this study, Ward said, ""by no means is Kentucky the only state with this problem.""[byline: Laura Ungar]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[In the absence of a vaccine, infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/220>.]
