South China Morning Post [edited]<http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/health-environment/article/1999751/string-botulism-cases-raises-health-officials>A woman has been hospitalized and is relying on feeding tubes after what government officials allege was the 10th suspected botulism case in just 2 months. Health Department officials confirmed yesterday [4 Aug 2016] that the 46-year-old Hong Kong woman had received 5 injections of suspected Botox to her face at an unnamed premises in Qinghu, Shenzhen on 8 Jul 2016.Just days after the treatment, the woman began experiencing slurred speech, difficulty swallowing and weakness in her arms and legs. She later sought medical assistance at North District Hospital on 3 Aug 2016 and was transferred to the Poison Treatment Centre at the Prince of Wales Hospital in Sha Tin for further care. The woman's condition is currently stable.Dr Tse Man-li, consultant at the Hospital Authority's Poison Information Centre, said the latest case was the most serious in a string of botulism incidents in Hong Kong. ""This case seems to be the most serious as she requires tubes for feeding ... but she can still walk and breathe,"" Tse said, noting that the location of the Botox injections in the woman's face and the delay in seeking medical attention had worsened her condition.Between 24 May 2016 to 3 Aug 2016, 10 women aged between 21 and 47 were treated by 6 public hospitals in Hong Kong for suspected botulism. Prior to that, health authorities had recorded just 2 cases in the past decade. Among the 10 cases, 8 are alleged to have been from injections administered in mainland China, 1 in Mong Kok and another yet to be confirmed by police. The rare spate of recent cases has alerted the city's health authorities over the quality of Botox involved in the cases.""We have this cluster of 10 cases in the recent 2 months, which is really rare,""Tse said. ""Botox is one million times more toxic than cyanide. A highly precise dilution is needed for injection. Where and how was the Botox produced? Were there other substances in the injection? Was the level of concentration strictly controlled?"" he asked.The series of severe post-Botox complications has prompted Hong Kong authorities to set up a helpline. He said the chance of poor quality Botox injections spreading in Hong Kong was minimal.Dr Wan Yuen-kong from the Department of Health said public education on beauty treatments had been enhanced, but investigations into the injections administered on the mainland were under the jurisdiction of authorities over the border.A police spokesperson said investigations were ongoing in the case that occurred in Mong Kok.[Byline: Elizabeth Cheung]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Clinical botulism has occurred following approved use of FDA licensed types of botulinum toxin and also after injection of toxin not approved for human injection, as can be seen in the see alsos below.ProMED continues to await more information about the source of the injected product and whether it was used by a medical professional. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/198>.]
