WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update - 269 (based on data up to 24 Jul 2016)--------------------------------------------------------SummaryInfluenza activity varied in countries of temperate South America and increased steadily in the last few weeks in South Africa, but remained low overall in most of Oceania. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere was at inter-seasonal levels.- In temperate South America, influenza-like illness (ILI) activity and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) indicators continued to increase in Chile and Paraguay. Influenza activity also increased in Chile and plateaued in Paraguay, while no influenza activity was reported in Uruguay. Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus co-circulated with influenza B viruses in Chile and Paraguay. In Argentina however, influenza activity continued to decrease, and ILI and SARI cases remained elevated but not increasing. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity remained elevated in the region.- In the temperate countries of Southern Africa, influenza detections among ILI patients continued to rise, with a notable shift from influenza B to influenza A(H3N2) predominating. Among patients with pneumonia, the incidence of RSV detections continued to decline compared to recent reporting periods.- In Oceania, influenza virus activity slightly increased but remained low. Influenza A(H3N2) predominated in Australia and New Caledonia where influenza activity increased in recent weeks, while New Zealand continued to see low levels of influenza activity. ILI activity in New Zealand remained low for this time of the year.- In the Caribbean countries, influenza B detections continued at low levels. Other respiratory virus activity remained generally low. SARI cases and hospitalizations decreased slightly in several countries.- In Central America, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained low in El Salvador. In Panama, detections of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 continued to decrease while detections of non-influenza respiratory viruses increased. In Costa Rica, influenza activity remained low while other respiratory virus activity increased with RSV predominating.- In tropical South America, influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and RSV activities generally decreased in recent weeks or remained low in most of the countries. SARI activities were continuing to decrease but remained elevated compared to the same period last year [2015] in Colombia. Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 detections continued to decrease in Ecuador. In Peru, influenza activity continued to decline with co-circulation of A(H1N1)pdm09 and influenza B while detection of other respiratory viruses increased, with RSV predominating. In Ecuador, SARI-related RSV and influenza detections increased slightly but remained at low levels.- In tropical countries of South Asia, influenza activity was generally low with influenza A and B viruses co-circulating in the region.- In the northern temperate and central tropical regions of Africa, influenza activity was generally low with influenza A(H3N2) virus detections predominant in Western Africa and influenza B virus detections predominant in Eastern and Northern Africa, among the few countries reporting data during this period.- In North America and Europe, influenza activity was low with influenza B predominant. ILI levels were below seasonal thresholds.- Influenza activity was low in temperate Asia with influenza B virus predominant.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 63 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 11 Jul 2016 to 24 Jul 2016 (data as of 5 Aug 2016 03:43:59 UTC). The WHO GISRS [Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System] laboratories tested more than 33 674 specimens during that time period. 1772 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 1149 (64.8 per cent) were typed as influenza A and 594 (33.5 per cent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 453 (50.3 per cent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 447 (49.7 per cent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 75 (29.6 per cent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 178 (70.4 per cent) to the B-Victoria lineage.[The detailed influenza update can be accessed at the source URL above.]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[In this update, influenza activity has remained variable but mostly elevated in most countries in temperate South America, high activity levels in South Africa, while low activity levels have been reported in Oceania and elsewhere.Influenza activity varied in countries of temperate South America and increased steadily in the last few weeks in South Africa, but remained low overall in most of Oceania. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere was at inter-seasonal levels.No novel influenza viruses were reported in this period, although a couple of human cases of influenza A/H3N2v were reported from Michigan (see ProMED-mail: Influenza, swine (02): USA (MI) human case, H3N2V 20160807.4399461). - Mod.UBA]
