BMC Med (2016) 14: 112. doi:10.1186/s12916-016-0660-0 [edited]<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12916-016-0660-0>ref: Boeuf P, Drummer HE, Richards JS, Scoullar MJ, Beeson JG. The global threat of Zika virus to pregnancy: epidemiology, clinical perspectives, mechanisms, and impact. BMC Med. 2016; 14(1): 112Summary-------Zika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquitoborne flavivirus that has newly emerged as a significant global threat, especially to pregnancy. Recent major outbreaks in the Pacific and in Central and South America have been associated with an increased incidence of microcephaly and other abnormalities of the central nervous system in neonates. The causal link between ZIKV infection during pregnancy and microcephaly is now strongly supported. Over 2 billion people live in regions conducive to ZIKV transmission, with approx. 4 million infections in the Americas predicted for 2016. Given the scale of the current pandemic and the serious and long-term consequences of infection during pregnancy, the impact of ZIKV on health services and affected communities could be enormous. This further highlights the need for a rapid global public health and research response to ZIKV to limit and prevent its impact through the development of therapeutics, vaccines, and improved diagnostics. Here we review the epidemiology of ZIKV; the threat to pregnancy; the clinical consequences and broader impact of ZIKV infections; and the virus biology underpinning new interventions, diagnostics, and insights into the mechanisms of disease.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall[This is an excellent summary of Zika virus' past, present and future in the Americas. ProMED-mail subscribers who have been following Zika virus in the Americas are urged to read the complete article. - Mod.TY]******[2] Genetically altered mosquitoes, FloridaDate: Fri 5 Aug 2016, 3.35 PM EDTSource: The Guardian [edited]<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/florida-genetically-modified-mosquitoes-zika>A release of genetically engineered mosquitoes that it is hoped could help combat the spread of the Zika virus has been approved in Florida by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).On [Thu 4 Aug 2016], Florida officials said the same species of mosquito had transmitted 15 Zika infections in the Wynwood neighborhood of Miami, the 1st cases to be caused by mosquitoes in the mainland US. [Now up to at least 21 cases <http://abcnews.go.com/Health/zika-virus-cases-reported-florida-outbreak/story?id=41243403> - Mod.TY].Hadyn Parry, chief executive of Oxitec, the company that created the genetically altered insects, said he was ""really pleased"" by the FDA approval of the experimental release, and called on authorities to grant Oxitec emergency authorization to release the insects in Miami as a control measure. ""We're really pleased today,"" said Parry. ""_Aedes aegypti_ is public enemy No 1. It is exclusively a human vector, it lives in and around the home, if you go into the center of town that's where it is.""Oxitec, a spinoff from a project at Oxford University, was recently purchased by Intrexon, the corporation that produces non-browning ""Arctic"" apples and fast-fattening ""AquaBounty"" salmon. The FDA announcement nearly clears the way for it to release the mosquitoes in an experimental trial on Key Haven, a small island in the Florida Keys. One obstacle remains, however: the voters of Monroe County.In November [2016], roughly 52 000 voters will decide if they want the trial to go forward. The referendum will not be legally binding, but most members of the elected Florida Keys mosquito control board have said they will abide by voters' wishes. The trial has been hotly contested, with many residents vocally opposed to the mosquitoes' release._Ae. aegypti_ is believed to be primarily responsible for the transmission of Zika, a primarily mosquitoborne disease believed to cause birth defects including microcephaly, by which children are born with abnormally small heads and severe, lifelong developmental problems.The Oxitec Florida trial would run for between 6-22 months, with a goal of determining whether wild _Ae. aegypti_ females, the gender that bites, will mate with the company's ""OX513A"" males, which are designed to produce offspring which do not fully mature, thus undercutting the mosquito population. It is not clear how many engineered mosquitoes could be released. Parry said it could vary from 20 to 100 mosquitoes per person on the island.The FDA announcement on [Fri 5 Aug 2016] was a finding of ""no significant"" environmental impact, from a review of Oxitec data on whether releasing the mosquitoes would have any knock-on effect, for example in the food chain. Thousands of public comments were also considered. Parry declined to say how much Oxitec mosquitoes would cost local municipalities, if the FDA approved wide release.Whether Keys voters approve the mosquito, however, may eventually prove irrelevant. Oxitec is releasing the insects on a trial basis in Panama, Brazil and the Cayman Islands, and has applied for experimental release permits in Sri Lanka and India.Oxitec is developing another species of mosquito, the _Ae. albopictus_, Parry said. Like _Ae. aegypti_, it is capable of transmitting Zika, dengue fever and chikungunya [viruses].--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Not surprisingly, there is likely to be some public opposition to the release from individuals who have concern about release of any genetically altered organisms. Explaining to the general public the biological principles involved in creating these mosquitoes in general terms will be a challenge. It will be difficult to reduce the discussion to costs and benefits when the public health costs are not quantified. However, the potential public health benefits are real and substantial. The ultimate question now is if the production of the male mosquitoes can be scaled up to cover very large geographic areas, such as entire states or countries.Interestingly, every week, scientists in Guangdong release 3 million bacteria-infected mosquitoes on a 3 km [1.5 mi] long island as part of efforts to wipe out diseases like dengue, yellow fever and Zika. The scientists inject mosquito eggs with wolbachia bacteria in a laboratory, and then release infected male mosquitoes on the island on the outskirts of Guangzhou. The bacteria, which occur naturally in about a quarter of wild mosquitoes, cause infected males to sterilize the females they mate with (<http://www.promedmail.org/dashboard/edit.php?id=4407318>. ProMED thanks rapporteur Mary Marshall for sending this report). - Mod.TY]******[3] VaccineDate: Fri 5 Aug 2016Source: Science [edited]<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6299/529.full>ref: Cohen J. Zika vaccine has a good shot. Science 2016;353(6299):529-30. DOI: 10.1126/science.353.6299.529Summary-------Monkey studies of 3 different Zika vaccines showed that each one completely protected the animals from a ""challenge"" with the virus. The data suggest that it should not be difficult to stop Zika virus with a vaccine, and the 1st human trials of a candidate product began last week. Adding a sense of urgency to the vaccine hunt, health officials confirmed the 1st local transmission of Zika virus occurred in the United States. The cases occurred just north of Miami, Florida, an area that modelers had predicted would be hit by the disease because of it has a favorable climate for the mosquitoes that carry the virus and also has many travelers coming from parts of Latin America that have had a Zika epidemic for the past year [2015]. Proving whether a vaccine works in humans, however, could be challenging, some modelers say. Specifically, the Latin America epidemic could leave large portions of the population immune, substantially reducing transmission as early as next year [2017] -- and making it more difficult to determine whether a vaccine can prevent spread.A research team from the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Silver Spring, Maryland, vaccinated 16 monkeys with 3 experimental vaccines and then ""challenged"" them with injections of Zika virus. As a control, they challenged 12 unvaccinated monkeys. None of the vaccinated monkeys became infected, whereas the Zika virus rose to high levels in the blood of all of the control animals. ""The protection was striking, and it certainly raises optimism about development of a Zika virus vaccine for humans,"" says Dan Barouch, an immunologist at Beth Israel who co-led the studies.The group tested 3 different approaches; 1 is a traditional vaccine that uses a whole, killed Zika virus. The 2nd contains DNA from Zika woven into a small, harmless circle of DNA called a plasmid; once in cells, this DNA produces Zika proteins that spark an immune response against them. The 3rd strategy stitched Zika genes into adenoviruses, which act as Trojan horses and infect cells to trigger immune responses.Barouch stresses that his group's data do not predict which vaccine will work best in humans. ""The goal of the study was not to have a cook-off of different vaccine modalities,"" he says. Instead, a key aim was to identify which components of the immune response correlated with protection against the virus to help guide human trials. Specifically, the monkey studies showed that even low levels of antibodies directed toward the Zika virus completely protected the animals.On 26 Jul [2016], Inovio Pharmaceuticals, a small company based in Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania, began the 1st human trials of a Zika vaccine. The biotech's DNA vaccine is being tested in a phase I study on 40 healthy people for safety and its ability to trigger immune responses. Others are in the works. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) in Rockville, Maryland, is collaborating with the Walter Reed group, the Butantan Institute in SÌ£o Paulo, Brazil, and the pharmaceutical company Sanofi Pasteur in Swiftwater, Pennsylvania, to develop 3 other Zika vaccines, including one that also uses Zika DNA alone and will likely enter human studies within the next few weeks.--communicated by:ProMED-mailpromed@promedmail.org[The race for an effective Zika virus vaccine is well and truly under way. The results of human trials are awaited with considerable interest. - Mod.TY]******[4] Congenital defectsDate: Wed 29 Jun 2016Source: The Lancet [edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)30883-2/abstract>ref: Martines RB, Bhatnagar J, de Oliveira Ramos AM, Davi HP, Iglezias SD, Kanamura CT, et al. Pathology of congenital Zika syndrome in Brazil: a case series. Lancet. 2016; pii: S0140-6736(16): 30883-2. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30883-2. Available at <http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(16)30883-2.pdf>.Summary-------BackgroundZika virus is an arthropodborne virus that is a member of the family Flaviviridae transmitted mainly by mosquitoes of the genus _Aedes_. Although usually asymptomatic, infection can result in a mild and self-limiting illness characterised by fever, rash, arthralgia, and conjunctivitis. An increase in the number of children born with microcephaly was noted in 2015 in regions of Brazil with high transmission of Zika virus. More recently, evidence has been accumulating supporting a link between Zika virus and microcephaly. Here, we describe findings from 3 fatal cases and 2 spontaneous abortions associated with Zika virus infection.MethodsIn this case series, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples from 5 cases, including 2 newborn babies with microcephaly and severe arthrogryposis who died shortly after birth, one 2 month old baby, and 2 placentas from spontaneous abortions, from Brazil were submitted to the Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Atlanta, GA, USA) between December, 2015, and March, 2016. Specimens were assessed by histopathological examination, immunohistochemical assays using a mouse anti-Zika virus antibody, and RT-PCR assays targeting the NS5 and envelope genes. Amplicons of RT-PCR positive cases were sequenced for characterisation of strains.FindingsViral antigens were localised to glial cells and neurons and associated with microcalcifications in all 3 fatal cases with microcephaly. Antigens were also seen in chorionic villi of 1 of the 1st trimester placentas. Tissues from all 5 cases were positive for Zika virus RNA by RT-PCR, and sequence analyses showed highest identities with Zika virus strains isolated from Brazil during 2015.InterpretationThese findings provide strong evidence of a link between Zika virus infection and different congenital central nervous system malformations, including microcephaly as well as arthrogryposis and spontaneous abortions.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides additional evidence for Zika virus as a cause of congenital malformations including microcephaly as well as arthrogryposis. Arthrogryposis has not been reported frequently as a prominent condition. - Mod.TY]******[5] Congenital Zika syndromeDate: Tue 9 Aug 2016Source: The BMJ [edited]<http://www.bmj.com/content/354/bmj.i3899>Vanessa van der Linden, Epitacio Leite Rolim Filho, Otavio Gomes Lins, Ana van der Linden, Maria de FÌÁtima Viana Vasco AragÌ£o, Alessandra Mertens Brainer-Lima, et al. Congenital Zika syndrome with arthrogryposis: retrospective case series study. BMJ. 2016; 354:i3899. Available at <http://www.bmj.com/content/bmj/354/bmj.i3899.full.pdf>.Abstract--------Objective: To describe the clinical, radiological, and electromyographic features in a series of children with joint contractures (arthrogryposis) associated with congenital infection presumably caused by Zika virus.Design: Retrospective case series studySetting: Association for Assistance of Disabled Children, Pernambuco state, Brazil.Participants: 7 children with arthrogryposis and a diagnosis of congenital infection presumably caused by Zika virus during the Brazilian microcephaly epidemic.Main outcome measures: Main clinical, radiological, and electromyographic findings, and likely correlation between clinical and primary neurological abnormalities.Results: The brain images of all 7 children were characteristic of congenital infection and arthrogryposis. 2 children tested positive for IgM to Zika virus in the cerebrospinal fluid. Arthrogryposis was present in the arms and legs of 6 children (86 per cent) and the legs of 1 child (14 per cent). Hip radiographs showed bilateral dislocation in 7 children, subluxation of the knee associated with genu valgus in 3 children (43 per cent), which was bilateral in 2 (29 per cent). All the children underwent high definition ultrasonography of the joints, and there was no evidence of abnormalities. Moderate signs of remodeling of the motor units and a reduced recruitment pattern were found on needle electromyography (monopolar). 5 of the children underwent brain computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and the remaining 2 CT only. All presented malformations of cortical development, calcifications predominantly in the cortex and subcortical white matter (especially in the junction between the cortex and white matter), reduction in brain volume, ventriculomegaly, and hypoplasia of the brainstem and cerebellum. MRI of the spine in 4 children showed apparent thinning of the cord and reduced ventral roots.Conclusions: Congenital Zika syndrome should be added to the differential diagnosis of congenital infections and arthrogryposis. The arthrogryposis was unrelated to the abnormalities of the joints themselves, but was possibly of neurogenic origin, with chronic involvement of central and peripheral motor neurones leading to deformities as a result of fixed postures in utero. Based on the neurophysiological observations, we suggest 2 possible mechanisms: tropism of neurones, with involvement of peripheral and central motor neurones, or a relation with vascular disorders.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall[This report provides additional evidence of arthrogryposis in congenital Zika virus infections. - Mod.TY]
