WHO Emergency: Zika Situation Report [edited]<http://who.int/emergencies/zika-virus/situation-report/28-july-2016/en/>Summary- WHO and partners established a definition of what constitutes an outbreak, endemic transmission, and the interruption of mosquitoborne transmission in order to better characterize the level of transmission of Zika virus infection. This classification system was put into use as of the situation report of 7 Jul 2016.- As of 27 Jul 2016, 67 countries and territories have reported evidence of mosquitoborne Zika virus transmission since 2007 (64 of these countries and territories have reported evidence of mosquitoborne Zika virus transmission since 2015):- 50 countries and territories with a 1st reported outbreak from 2015 onwards.- 4 countries are classified as having possible endemic transmission or have reported evidence of local mosquito-borne Zika infections in 2016.- 13 countries and territories have reported evidence of local mosquitoborne Zika infections in or before 2015, but without documentation of cases in 2016, or with the outbreak terminated.- 1 country and 1 territory have reported mosquitoborne Zika virus transmission for the 1st time in the week to 27 Jul 2016, Antigua and Barbuda; and Turks and Caicos (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).- Since February 2016, 11 countries have reported evidence of person-to-person transmission of Zika virus, probably via a sexual route.- 1 case of Zika virus infection, whose mode of transmission is currently being investigated, was recently reported in Utah, USA. The case is a family contact of an individual who died in June [2016]. The blood samples of the deceased case were found to have high levels of Zika virus, more than 100 000 times higher than what has been found in samples from other infected persons. Result of the investigation on the mode of transmission is pending.- 2 non travel-related Zika infections are currently being investigated in Florida, USA. [now up to 21 cases; see above reports. - Mod.TY]- As of 27 Jul 2016, 14 countries or territories have reported microcephaly and other central nervous system (CNS) malformations potentially associated with Zika virus infection or suggestive of congenital infection. Paraguay is the latest country to report microcephaly with 2 cases of microcephaly associated with laboratory confirmed Zika virus infection recently documented. 3 of the 14 total countries reported microcephaly cases born from mothers in countries with no endemic Zika virus transmission but who reported recent travel history to Zika-affected countries in the WHO Region of the Americas.- In Spain, the 1st baby with microcephaly linked with in-utero Zika infection was born. This microcephaly case was 1st reported at the end of May [2016].- As of 27 Jul 2016, the US CDC reported 12 live-born infants with birth defects and 6 pregnancy losses with birth defects with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection.- As of 27 Jul 2016, 15 countries and territories worldwide have reported an increased incidence of Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome (GBS) and/or laboratory confirmation of a Zika virus infection among GBS cases.- Based on research to date, there is scientific consensus that Zika virus is a cause of microcephaly and GBS.- In Guinea-Bissau, on 29 Jun 2016, Institute Pasteur Dakar (IPD) confirmed that 3 of 12 samples tested positive for Zika by PCR. All 12 samples tested negative against IgM Zika. 1 additional sample from a recent case also tested positive for Zika virus infection. All 4 samples were sent to IPD on 1 Jul [2016] for gene sequencing and the results are pending and 22 additional samples were collected and sent for testing; the results are still pending. The government of Guinea-Bissau with support from the WHO Country Office (WCO) is demonstrating strong leadership in response to these findings. A national Zika-inter-ministerial committee which is chaired by the prime minister and vice-chaired by the minister of health was established. The joint mission to Guinea-Bissau has arrived in the country to support the Ministry of Health's response and to conduct an in-depth investigation of the situation. Technical material and financial support are also being provided by partners including US-CDC, Portuguese cooperation, IPD and UNICEF.- A roster of WHO technical experts will be available to answer media queries during the Olympics.- The global Strategic Response Framework launched by WHO in February 2016 encompasses surveillance, response activities and research. An interim report describing some of the key activities being undertaken jointly by WHO and international, regional and national partners in response to this public health emergency was published on 27 May 2016. A revised strategy for the period of July 2016 to December 2017 was published on 17 Jun [2016].- WHO has developed advice and information on diverse topics in the context of Zika virus. WHO's latest information materials, news and resources to support corporate and programmatic risk communication and community engagement are available online.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] PAHO/WHO Zika update, AmericasDate: Fri 29 Jul 2016Source: PAHO/WHO Zika Epidemiological Update [edited]<http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=35555&lang=en>Incidence and trends--------------------To date, 42 countries and territories have confirmed local, vectorborne transmission of Zika virus disease in the Region of the Americas since 2015: Anguilla; Antigua and Barbuda; Argentina; Aruba; Barbados; Belize; Bolivia (Plurinational State of); Bonaire, Sint Eustatius, and Saba; Brazil; Colombia; Costa Rica; Cuba; Cura̤ao; Dominica; the Dominican Republic; Ecuador; El Salvador; French Guiana; Grenada; Guadeloupe; Guatemala; Guyana; Haiti; Honduras; Jamaica; Martinique; Mexico; Nicaragua; Panama; Paraguay; Peru; Puerto Rico; Saint Barth̩lemy; Saint Lucia; Saint Martin; Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Sint Maarten; Suriname; Trinidad and Tobago; Turks and Caicos Islands; the United States Virgin Islands; and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). In addition, 5 countries in the Americas have reported sexually transmitted Zika cases (Argentina, Canada, Chile, Peru, and the United States of America). Since the last Pan American Health Organization/ World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) Zika Epidemiological Update on 14 July 2016, Antigua and Barbuda and the Turks and Caicos Islands confirmed vectorborne autochthonous transmission of Zika virus. In addition, Canada has reported 169 travel-related Zika virus disease cases detected as of 28 Jul 2016.On 29 Jul 2016, the US CDC reported the detection of 4 cases of Zika virus infections that were likely caused by bites of local _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes in the state of Florida. CDC is closely coordinating with Florida officials who are leading the ongoing investigations [The total is now up to 21 cases. - Mod.TY].On 21 Jul 2016, the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz) informed of the preliminary results of an entomological investigation in the state of Pernambuco where researchers detected the presence of _Culex quinquefasciatus_ infected with Zika virus via quantitative RT-PCR. The mosquitoes were collected around residences of reported cases of Zika virus disease in Recife and Acroverde in the state of Pernambuco.In the last 4 weeks of reported data, an increasing trend in cases has been observed in Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Puerto Rico, Saint Barthelemy, Saint Martin, the US Virgin Islands, and Venezuela.This week, the Zika epidemiological situation in Brazil, Guatemala, Mexico, Puerto Rico, and Saint Martin is highlighted below.BrazilBetween epidemiological week (EW) 1 and EW 26 of 2016, Brazil has reported 165 907 suspected and confirmed Zika virus disease cases. The epidemiological curve shows a sustained decrease in cases starting in EW 8 of 2016 and onward.GuatemalaAs of EW 28 of 2016, Guatemala has reported a total of 2133 suspected Zika virus disease cases. The epidemiological curve of the cases reported in 2016 shows a bi-modal distribution, with a peak in cases observed in EW 6 and in EW 25 of 2016.MexicoAs of EW 28 of 2016, Mexico had reported a total of 1115 confirmed Zika virus disease cases. The epidemiological curve shows a marked increase starting in EW 19 of 2016.Puerto RicoAs of EW 27 of 2016, Puerto Rico has reported 5572 confirmed cases of Zika virus disease. The epidemiological curve of these cases shows an increasing trend with an average of 855 cases per week in the last 4 weeks.Saint MartinAs of EW 28 of 2016, Saint Martin, the overseas collectivity of France, has reported 1580 suspected Zika virus disease cases, of which 200 are confirmed. The epidemiological curve of the suspected cases shows an increasing trend with most reports in the last 8 weeks.Congenital syndrome associated with Zika virus infection--------------------------------------------------------Since the last PAHO/WHO Zika Epidemiological Update on 14 Jul 2016, 1 additional country has reported cases of microcephaly associated with Zika virus infection, Paraguay, and 6 countries have updated the number of reported cases presented in Table 1. Also, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras are investigating congenital syndrome cases suspected to be associated with Zika virus infection.On 25 Jul 2016, Canada reported a case of maternal-fetal transmission of Zika virus. The mother developed fever, muscle and joint pain, rash and conjunctivitis in her 1st trimester of pregnancy while on visit to Colombia. A positive PCR result in cerebrospinal fluid was reported after the birth of the infant and the infant appears to be generally healthy with no abnormalities detected.BrazilAccording to the Brazil Ministry of Health, between 22 Oct 2015 and 23 Jul 2016, a total of 8703 suspected cases of microcephaly and other congenital malformations of the central nervous system (CNS) have been reported in newborns. Of these, 1749 cases were confirmed by laboratory criteria. Out of the total cases reported, 3892 were discarded as being due to noninfectious causes or not fitting the case definition, and 3062 remain under investigation. Of the reported cases, 371 correspond to stillbirths or neonatal deaths (4.3 per cent of the total); 106 of them were confirmed by laboratory criteria.In addition, between 1 Aug 2015 and 23 Jul 2016, there were 2074 cases of microcephaly reported in the state of Pernambuco, including 78 deaths (3.8 per cent). The temporal distribution of the prevalence rate of microcephaly per 10 000 newborns, shows a peak at EW 48 of 2015 followed by a decline that continued to EW 20 of 2016. In EW 21 of 2016, the prevalence rate rose again, reaching 41.7/10 000 newborns up to EW 29 of 2016.ColombiaBetween EW 1 and EW 28 of 2016 a total of 297 microcephaly cases were reported in Colombia. This number represents an increase compared to the expected historical annual mean (140 cases per year). Of the 297 cases notified, 21 cases were confirmed for association with Zika virus infection, 80 cases were discarded and 196 remain under investigation.GuatemalaOn 27 Jul 2016, the Guatemala Ministry of Health reported 16 probable cases of congenital syndrome associated with Zika virus (15 cases of microcephaly and 1 case of other congenital anomalies). According to the Ministry of Health, all of the mothers were in the 1st 2 trimesters of their pregnancy when they presented symptoms compatible with Zika virus disease. Laboratory test results and final classification of the cases are pending.Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome and other neurological disorders--------------------------------------------------------To date [29 Jul 2016], 11 countries and territories in the Region have reported an increase in cases of Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome (GBS). 4 other countries and territories have not recorded an increase in GBS but have identified Zika virus-associated cases of GBS.GuadeloupePer the information published in the Cire Antilles Guyane bulletin, Zika virus infection has been confirmed in a total of 8 patients with Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome (GBS) in Guadeloupe and 9 other cases are under investigation. Also, Zika virus infection was confirmed in 5 other patients who presented with other neurological disorders than GBS.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp[This report contains interesting tables and graphs. Interested readers are advised to see the original report at the above URL. - Mod.TY]******[4] Persistence in semenDate: Thu 11 Aug 2016Source: EuroSurveillance [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22556>ref: Barzon L, Pacenti M, Franchin E, Lavezzo E, Trevisan M, Sgarabotto D, et al. Infection dynamics in a traveller with persistent shedding of Zika virus RNA in semen for six months after returning from Haiti to Italy, January 2016. Euro Surveill. 2016; 21(32): pii=30316. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.32.30316SummaryWe describe the dynamics of Zika virus (ZIKV) infection in a man in his early 40s who developed fever and rash after returning from Haiti to Italy, in January 2016. Follow-up laboratory testing demonstrated detectable ZIKV RNA in plasma up to day 9 after symptom onset and in urine and saliva up to days 15 and 47, respectively. Notably, persistent shedding of ZIKV RNA was demonstrated in semen, still detectable at 181 days after onset.DiscussionA remarkable aspect of this case was the long duration of viral nucleic acid shedding in semen (still detectable in semen at 181 days after symptom onset). Moreover, testing of serial samples allowed us to characterise the pattern of ZIKV shedding in semen and other bodily fluids during the course of infection. In addition to semen, viral RNA was detectable for a long period also in saliva, as previously described in another patient, notwithstanding the rapid induction of ZIKV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies and high-titre neutralising antibodies. The mechanisms of ZIKV persistence in the human host, the cellular reservoirs involved, as well as the mechanisms of viral clearance are still unknown and should be investigated.Since ZIKV infection may be transmitted through sexual intercourse, data from this case suggest a prolonged potential for sexual transmission. However, the presence of ZIKV RNA in semen does not imply the presence of infective virus - it could just represent a trace of past infection.The results of this study may have potential implications for preconception counseling recommendations. According to the current recommendation of the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, men who have had a diagnosis of ZIKV disease and do not reside in an area with active ZIKV transmission should wait for at least 6 months after symptom onset before attempting conception. This interval was recommended based on information regarding persistence of ZIKV RNA in semen thus far available and allowed for 3 times the longest period that ZIKV RNA had been detected in semen after symptom onset (62 days). Similar recommendations have been released by WHO, which advise male travellers returning from areas of known ZIKV transmission to adopt safer sex practices and wait at least 8 weeks (6 months if symptomatic) before trying to conceive. At the light of this new evidence on long-term ZIKV RNA persistence in semen, an extension of this interval might be considered or ZIKV RNA testing in semen after the 8-week or 6-month period might be advised.The pattern of ZIKV shedding in semen is largely unknown. In the case reported here, longitudinal sampling showed continuous shedding of ZIKV RNA at a stable and relatively high load. This finding would support ZIKV RNA testing of semen samples to detect infection, as proposed also by WHO guidance. However, if a 1st result is negative, testing of at least an additional semen sample should be recommended before excluding infection, because of the risk of false-negative results, as shown in the case described here.The risk of sexual transmission of ZIKV seems to be associated with excretion of ZIKV at high viral load during the early phase of infection, but cases of late sexual transmission as well as transmission between asymptomatic individuals have been also reported. In the case described here, ZIKV RNA load was low in semen samples collected 3 months after symptom onset. Transmission with such a low level of ZIKV RNA in semen has not been established, but cannot be ruled out. Thus, due to the limited available information, as a precautionary measure when issuing recommendations, the risk of transmission through sexual intercourse or gamete donation in the presence of low-level ZIKV nucleic acids in semen samples should not be overlooked, balancing the principles of precaution and proportionality. Further studies are also warranted to establish the prevalence and duration of ZIKV shedding in semen, the risk of virus transmission through semen, and the cells targeted by ZIKV infection in the genital tract.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report extends the period of Zika virus RNA in semen for a significantly longer period of time than previously observed. Although Zika virus RNA was detected, the key to sexual transmission is if infectious virus is being shed in semen, as the authors note. Until live virus shedding is determined, recommendations for abstinence or use of condoms to prevent transmission to sexual partners will remain best estimates. - Mod.TY]******[5] VaccinesDate: Wed 3 Aug 2016Source: The Washington Post [edited]<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-health/wp/2016/08/03/nih-to-begin-testing-zika-vaccine-in-humans/>Federal researchers on Wed [3 Aug 2016] announced a milestone in that effort: their 1st clinical trial in humans. The trial will involve at least 80 healthy volunteers between ages 18 and 35 at 3 locations around the United States, including at the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center in Bethesda. The main goal of the study will be to evaluate the vaccine's safety and to see whether it generates an immune-system response in patients. If those early results are positive, researchers hope to begin a larger-scale trial in Zika-affected countries in early 2017.""A safe and effective vaccine to prevent Zika virus infection and the devastating birth defects it causes is a public health imperative,"" Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said in a statement. ""NIAID worked expeditiously to ready a vaccine candidate, and results in animal testing have been very encouraging. We are pleased that we are now able to proceed with this initial study in people. Although it will take some time before a vaccine against Zika is commercially available, the launch of this study is an important step forward.""Various private efforts are under way to create Zika vaccines, part of a global effort by scientists to better understand and fight the mysterious virus.In June [2016], Pennsylvania vaccine maker Inovio Pharmaceuticals and South Korea's GeneOne Life Sciences announced plans to start testing a DNA vaccine, known as GLS-5700, on humans. Inovio chief executive J Joseph Kim said the company, which is also working on vaccines for other devastating global viruses such as Ebola and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), hoped to report results later this year.The experimental vaccine that NIH researchers are testing includes a small, circular piece of DNA, known as a plasmid, which scientists engineered to contain genes that code for proteins of the Zika virus. After the vaccine is injected into a person's arm, cells read the genes and begin to produce Zika virus proteins. The goal is to jump start the body into creating an immune response that would then protect against an infection from an actual Zika virus.Other sites participating in the Zika trial include the Center for Vaccine Development at the University of Maryland School of Medicine and Emory University in Atlanta.Developing vaccines typically is an arduous process that can take decades and cost hundreds of millions of dollars. That's partly why, in recent years, many pharmaceuticals companies have scaled back vaccine research efforts and focused their efforts on developing newer versions of already existing vaccines. In some cases, such as during the Ebola epidemic, the government has stepped into that vacuum to fund the study of vaccines that otherwise likely would go undeveloped.[byline: Brady Dennis]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides some recent information about Zika virus vaccine development. Additional information from NIH about their vaccine is available at <https://www.niaid.nih.gov/news/QA/Pages/Zika-DNA-Vaccine-QA.aspx>. It is encouraging to see some vaccines entering phase 1 trials to test their safety in humans. There are still 2 more phases yet to go, to test their efficacy, that will require several months to complete. The results are awaited with interest. - Mod.TY]
