Perth Now [edited]<http://www.perthnow.com.au/news/western-australia/potentially-poisonous-algae-warning-for-shellfish-caught-in-perths-swan-and-canning-rivers/news-story/5a24fe10141eda0a4c82d9f5530478f1>Potentially poisonous algae warning for shellfish caught in Perth's Swan and Canning rivers-------------------------------------------------------------------The Department of Health is warning people not to eat shellfish caught in the Swan and Canning Rivers after dangerous algae was detected. The potentially harmful microscopic algae has been detected in the lower part of the rivers. Areas affected are downstream from the Causeway to Fremantle in the Swan River and downstream from Riverton Bridge to the Canning Highway in the Canning River.WA [Western Australia] Health environmental health director Jim Dodds said the algae _Dinophysis acuminata_ could produce shellfish poisoning. ""These algae, which are not visible to the naked eye, can produce toxins which could be absorbed by filter feeding shellfish,"" Mr Dodds said. ""Symptoms of shellfish poisoning include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal pain. Anyone who has eaten shellfish and experiences these symptoms should seek medical attention. Other recreational activities including swimming, fishing and boating are not affected by this species of microscopic algae.""Shellfish includes oysters, mussels, clams, pipis, scallops, cockles and razorclams. They do not include crustaceans such as shrimp, prawns, crabs or lobsters.According to the Department of Health, people should avoid eating wild shellfish collected recreationally because their safety could not be guaranteed. Mr Dodds said farmed shellfish bought in supermarkets and other commercial outlets in WA were not affected because there was a strict quality-assurance program to ensure they were safe for human consumption.[byline: Sophie Gabrielle]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] USA - CaliforniaDate: Wed 10 Aug 2016Source: KTVU [edited]<http://www.ktvu.com/news/188279936-story>Water samples from Discovery Bay test positive for toxic algae--------------------------------------------------------------Contra Costa County [California] health officials today [10 Aug 2016] confirmed the presence of a potentially harmful toxin in waters around Discovery Bay. The United States Environmental Protection Agency lab in Richmond found microcystin, which is produced by certain algal species.Contra Costa Health Services' Environmental Health Division and the California State Water Resources Control Board recommended that residents, pets and livestock avoid contact with water around Discovery Bay. Exposure to blue-green algae can cause rashes, skin and eye irritation, allergic reactions, or gastrointestinal upset.""Dogs are especially vulnerable to getting sick from exposure to toxic algae blooms, and there have been reports in the past of dogs dying after exposure to water with blue-green algae blooms,"" Beverley Anderson-Abbs, an environmental scientist with the State Water Board, said in a statement. Discovery Bay's tap water is not affected, county health officials said. A map of the areas sampled, which include Harbor Bay, Marina Bay, and Sand Bay, can be found on <http://www.cchealth.org>.Anderson-Abbs said, ""It is important for people to understand that sampling did not take place in all areas of Discovery Bay. Bloom conditions can change rapidly, and we recommend minimizing contact with the water and algae in Discovery Bay.""--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Regarding Australia:_Dinophysis acuminata_ is an armoured, marine, planktonic dinoflagellate species. It is a toxic species associated with diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP) events and is commonly found in coastal waters of the northern Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.This particular toxic algae is associated with a number of toxic principles. It produces okadaic acid (OA), dinophysis toxins (DTXs) which are the main toxins implicated in DSP outbreaks. It is also known to produce pectenotoxins (PTXs). Some strains appear to produce only PTX (Nielsen, et al. 2012), others only OA (FernÌÁndez, et al. 2001), others DTX1 and PTX2 (Suzuki, et al. 2009) or a mixture of OA, DTXs and PTXs (Miles, et al. 2004). This particular toxic algae is capable of producing a number of toxic agents which is why this one can be particularly dangerous.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing Australia is available at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/289>.Regarding the USA:If the drinking water associated with Discovery Bay is not affected, then one has to wonder how that is. The toxin of these algaes may be present even if the algae organism is not present. So how are they so sure that the toxins are not in the water? What testing are they doing?A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing California is available at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/4569>.General information regarding toxic algae:There are a number of very toxic blue-green algae or cyanobacteria. The toxin may be present even if the algae are not, and likewise the algae may be present but the toxin may not be. However, safety for humans and animals means avoiding bodies of water with any blue-green algae.""There are a number of blue-green algae, many of which are toxic, frequently resulting in rapid death for animals. Blue-green algae, also known as cyanobacteria, are a group of photosynthetic bacteria that many people refer to as 'pond scum.' Blue-green algae are most often blue-green in color, but can also be blue, green, reddish-purple, or brown. Blue-green algae generally grow in lakes, ponds, and slow-moving streams when the water is warm and enriched with nutrients like phosphorus or nitrogen.""When environmental conditions are just right, blue-green algae can grow very quickly. Most species are buoyant and will float to the surface, where they form scum layers or floating mats. When this happens, we call this a 'blue-green algae bloom'. Blue-green algae blooms generally occur between mid-June and late September, although in rare instances, blooms have been observed in winter, even under the ice. Also in warmer years, blooms may be found in the northern hemisphere as early as April.""Many different species of blue-green algae occur, but the most commonly detected include _Anabaena_ sp, _Aphanizomenon_ sp, _Microcystis_ sp, and _Planktothrix_ sp. It is not always the same species that blooms in a given water body, and the dominant species can change over the course of the season.""Blue-green algal toxins are naturally produced chemical compounds that sometimes are produced inside the cells of certain species of blue-green algae. These chemicals are not produced all of the time, and there is no easy way to tell when blue-green algae are producing them and when they are not. When the cells are broken open, the toxins may be released. Sometimes this occurs when the cells die off naturally and they break open as they sink and decay in a lake or pond. Cells may also be broken open when the water is treated with chemicals meant to kill algae, and when cells are swallowed and mixed with digestive acids in the stomachs of people or animals.""Typical clinical signs in dogs exposed to blue-green algae include seizures, vomiting, and/or diarrhea after contact with surface water. Although the water appears clear, if a 'bloom' is just starting, it may be difficult to see any sheen, an early indication of blue-green algae formation. Some forms of blue-green algae may start forming slightly below the surface and may not be visible, but are just as toxic.""One toxic alga frequently involved in illness and deaths is _Microcystis aeruginosa_, a single-celled blue green alga, or cyanobacterium, that occurs naturally in surface waters. Microcystis can proliferate to form dense blooms and mats under certain conditions. Many variants of these cyanobacteria produce multiple toxins, including the potent liver toxin microcystin. When microcystis die, their cells break open, releasing the toxin microcystin into the water. Ingestion of water or algal cells containing microcystin has produced adverse effects in fish, dogs, cats, livestock, and humans. Sometimes the mats and the sheen of the organisms are visible on the surface of the water, if it is a pond. In larger bodies of water, such as large lakes, it may be more difficult or impossible to see the sheen or the mat of accumulation.""People swimming in dense microcystis blooms have experienced irritation such as skin rashes, burns, and blistering of the mouth. Ingestion or inhalation of water containing dense bloom material may cause vomiting, nausea, headaches, diarrhea, pneumonia, and fever. Ingestion of significant levels of the toxin microcystin can cause liver damage and dysfunction in humans and animals. No deaths from ingestion of microcystins have been reported in humans in the US; however, Brazil has reported human deaths. Dogs, wildlife, and livestock have died following exposure to this toxin.""Microcystis blooms typically thrive in warm, turbid, and slow-moving waters. The blooms with the highest biomass occur in waters that are high in nitrogen or phosphorus (eutrophic waters). Microcystis also requires sufficient light intensity to conduct photosynthesis, which results in blooms.""The commonest route of exposure to microcystin is drinking water, followed by recreational exposures and food supplements. Typical water treatment processes do not fully remove microcystin that might be present in drinking water supplies stored in reservoirs. Swimming and playing in water that contains, or recently contained, microcystis blooms is another common exposure route. Children have the highest risk of exposure since they tend to unintentionally ingest water while swimming. Microcystin can move through the aquatic food web, exposing fish and shellfish, as well as the people who consume them. Microcystin does not remain in edible fish and shellfish tissues for more than a few weeks. However, people who frequently consume sport fish caught from a water body that supports microcystis blooms have a higher risk of exposure. Dogs can ingest large amounts of microcystis cells when they clean their coats after playing in water. Livestock, wildlife, and dogs are exposed through drinking water containing microcystis or through ingesting algal mats.""Toxins produced by blue-green algae-----------------------------------Toxins are compounds that have a harmful effect on other cells, tissues and organisms. In the natural environment, these toxins are generally contained within the blue-green algal cell but they are released into the water when the cell is damaged or dies.Blue-green algal toxins can be divided into the following groups:1. Hepatotoxins- Hepatotoxins cause blood to collect in the liver causing circulatory shock and can lead to death by internal hemorrhaging.- Hepatotoxins can cause weakness, vomiting and diarrhoea.- Nodularin and microcystin are 2 types of hepatotoxins.- Nodularin is produced by the algal species _Nodularia spumigena_.- Microcystins can bioaccumulate in aquatic invertebrates such as mussels so aquatic animals caught from water where there is an algal bloom should not be eaten.2. Neurotoxins- Neurotoxins interfere with the functioning of the nervous system and can cause death of humans and animals within minutes by causing paralysis of the respiratory muscles.- Marine dinoflagellates (red tides) produce saxitoxins (also known as paralytic shellfish poisons) which concentrate in shellfish and have been known to cause death in humans.3. Non-specific toxins- Cylindrospermopsin is a non-specific toxin produced by the blue-green algae _Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii_ and _Aphanizomenon ovalisporum_.- This toxin is a relatively slow-acting toxin that damages most organs in the body including the liver.4. Dermatoxic lipopolysachharides- When non-toxic species of blue-green algae are present at concentrations above 10 cubic mm per litre, the water may still pose a risk to recreational and domestic users as all blue-green algae have lipopolysachharides in their cell walls.- Lipopolysachharides are less toxic than hepatotoxins or neurotoxins but are significant in terms of water supply for drinking, showering and recreation.- Lipopolysachharides have been associated with outbreaks of gastroenteritis, skin and eye irritations, and hay fever, in humans who have come into contact with algal blooms. Humans who contact lipopolysachharides in the aerosol form (fine spray such as from a sprinkler) may suffer asthma, eczema, and blisters in the lining of the nose and mouth.A microscopic look at microcystin can be found at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microcystis_aeruginosa> and <https://www.epa.gov/nutrient-policy-data/cyanobacteriacyanotoxins>. The 2nd link also has pictures of how the water looks with this organism.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://oehha.ca.gov/media/downloads/ecotoxicology/fact-sheet/microfactsheet122408.pdf>, <http://www.water.nsw.gov.au/water-management/water-quality/algal-information> and <http://botany.si.edu/references/dinoflag/Taxa/Dacuminata.htm>. - Mod.TG]
