24 News HD [edited]<http://channel24.pk/breaking-news/2016/08/13/alarming-situation-congo-virus-claims-another-life-multan/>Another Congo virus [Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever] patient has died in Multan Nishtar Hospital [Multan, Punjab state] on Saturday [13 Aug 2016]. According to details, the patient was admitted in the hospital a few days ago in suspicion of Congo virus. He was admitted in special ward for treatment while today doctors have confirmed his death.Health experts advised the citizens to take special preventive measures to protect from carrying Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF).According to them, healthcare workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Congo virus, or handling specimens from them, should implement standard infection control precautions. These include basic hand hygiene, use of personal protective equipment, safe injection practices, and safe burial practicesDr Wasim Khawaja, a public health specialist at Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS), said to reduce the risk of tick-to-human transmission, people should wear protective clothing like long sleeves or long trousers and wear light coloured clothing to allow easy detection of ticks on the clothes. He said people should use approved chemicals intended to kill ticks on clothing; use approved repellent on the skin and clothing; regularly examine clothing and skin for ticks; if found, remove them; and avoid areas where ticks are abundant and seasons when they are most active.Dr Khawaja said in order to reduce the risk of animal-to-human transmission, people should wear gloves and other protective clothing while handling animals or their tissues in endemic areas, notably during slaughtering, butchering, and culling procedures in slaughterhouses or at home. He added to reduce the risk of human-to-human transmission in the community, people should avoid close physical contact with CCHF-infected people, wear gloves and protective equipment when taking care of ill people, and wash hands regularly after caring for or visiting ill people. Medical practitioner at Federal Government Poly Clinic (FGPC) Dr Sharif Astori said the virus is primarily transmitted to people from ticks and livestock animals.He added that human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. He said CCHF is a widespread disease caused by a tick-borne virus. The hosts of the CCHF virus included a wide range of wild and domestic animals such as cattle, sheep, and goats.He said animals become infected by the bite of infected ticks and the virus remains in their bloodstream for about one week after infection, allowing the tick-animal-tick cycle to continue when another tick bites. The CCHF virus is transmitted to people either by tick bites or through contact with infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughter, he added.He said majority of cases have occurred in people involved in the livestock industry, such as agricultural workers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians. He said human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. Hospital-acquired infections can also occur due to improper sterilization of medical equipment, reuse of needles and contamination of medical supplies, he added.He said following infection by a tick bite, the incubation period is usually 1 to 3 days, with a maximum of 9 days. The incubation period following contact with infected blood or tissues is usually 5 to 6 days, with symptoms including fever, muscle ache, dizziness, neck pain and stiffness, backache, headache, sore eyes and photophobia (sensitivity to light).He said there may be nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, and sore throat early on, followed by sharp mood swings and confusion. After 2 to 4 days, the agitation may be replaced by sleepiness, depression, and lassitude, and the abdominal pain may localize to the upper right quadrant, with detectable hepatomegaly (liver enlargement).He said other clinical signs included fast heart rate), enlarged lymph nodes, and a rash caused by bleeding into the skin on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth and throat, and on the skin. Dr Astori said there is usually evidence of hepatitis, and severely ill patients may experience rapid kidney deterioration, sudden liver failure or pulmonary failure after the 5th day of illness. The mortality rate from CCHF is approximately 30 percent, with death occurring in the 2nd week of illness. In patients who recover, improvement generally begins on the 9th or 10th day after the onset of illness.[Byline: Shoaib Raja]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Karachi (Sindh): fatal case, ex AfghanistanDate: Fri 12 Aug 2016Source: The News International [edited]<https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/141831-Congo-fever-claims-another-life-within-a-fortnight>A 65-year-old man died of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) at a private hospital on Thursday [11 Aug 2016], becoming the 2nd victim in 2 weeks. The Sindh government's focal person confirmed the death of [the man], who hailed from Afghanistan and had been under treatment at the hospital. With his death, the number of the victims of Congo fever in the city had risen to 4 this year [2016], he said.On [30 Jul 2016], Dr SA, a general surgeon from the Victoria Hospital in Bahawalpur died of this fever at the Aga Khan Hospital [AKUH] in Karachi, while another doctor from the same hospital was treated there. Dr SA had contracted the disease while treating a female patient. 2 other doctors also fell ill treating her.The patient, a 4th-year medical student, died during treatment while the 3 doctors who supervised her treatment fell sick and were admitted to the AKUH on 28 Jul [2016].Dr Zafar Mehdi, the focal person for _Naegleria fowleri_ and other infectious diseases at the Sindh health department, said Dr SA was diagnosed positive for CCHF and he had passed away [30 Jul 2016]. ""Dr [SA] and the 2 other doctors had operated on the patient around 10 days ago,"" he added.The CCHF is a deadly disease caused by a virus that is carried by a tick or parasite that lives on cattle and other animals. Any contact of humans with the tick present on the skin of the livestock or animals results in an infection. The infected person can then infect other people.The CCHF cases in Pakistan are commonly reported in Balochistan, where livestock traders and their handlers often contract the disease from their animals, but recently there have been several cases in Karachi. It is perhaps for the 1st time in recent years that a CCHF case from lower Punjab has been reported.The national health ministry has asked both the Punjab and Sindh health departments to stay vigilant as the disease was extremely dangerous and had a 90 to 95 mortality rate.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The CCHF virus is tick borne and can cause severe viral hemorrhagic fever outbreaks, with a case fatality rate of 10-40 per cent (the 2nd report above states an extremely high mortality rate, which is incorrect). High mortality rates are observed only if there are hemorrhagic manifestations of the disease; in general up to 80 percent of infections are asymptomatic (Vorou R, Pierroutsakos IN, Maltezou HC: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2007; 20(5): 495-500; <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17762783>).The virus is transmitted by _Hyalomma_ spp ticks or through contact with infected human blood or animal blood and tissues during and immediately after slaughter.The 2 reports above do not elaborate on the occupational or exposure history of the patients. However, the majority of cases have occurred in people involved in the livestock industry, such as agricultural workers, slaughterhouse workers, and veterinarians, as mentioned in the 1st report above. Exposure in health care facilities can occur, which is why there is a constant concern for training health care workers who are in contact with suspected CCHF cases.Perhaps it is time to work on formulating awareness messages to reach the susceptible groups in the general public, such as livestock handlers, and butchers as well, so that exposures can be minimized. - Mod.UBAMaps of Pakistan can be seen at <http://www.mapsofworld.com/pakistan/pakistan-political-map.html> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/140>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
