International New York Times [edited]<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/15/world/venezuela-malaria-mines.html> Seeking Gold, Getting Malaria.------------------------Many turn to panning for black-market gold in the watery pits of mines, where mosquitoes infect them. Once they return home to recover, the disease spreads.The 12th time [RB] got malaria, he hardly rested at all. With the fever still rattling his body, he threw a pick ax over his shoulder and got back to work -- smashing stones in an illegal gold mine. As a computer technician from a big city, [RB] was ill-suited for the mines, his soft hands used to working keyboards, not the earth. But Venezuela's economy collapsed on so many levels that inflation had obliterated his salary, along with his hopes of preserving a middle-class life.So, like tens of thousands of other people from across the country, [RB] came to these open, swampy mines scattered across the jungle, looking for a future. Here, waiters, office workers, taxi drivers, college graduates, and even civil servants on vacation from their government jobs are out panning for black-market gold, all under the watchful eyes of an armed group that taxes them and threatens to tie them to posts if they disobey.It is a society turned upside down, a place where educated people abandon once-comfortable jobs in the city for dangerous, backbreaking work in muddy pits, desperate to make ends meet. And it comes with a steep price: malaria, long driven to the fringes of the country, is festering in the mines and back with a vengeance.Venezuela was the 1st nation in the world to be certified by the World Health Organization for eradicating malaria in its most populated areas, beating the United States and other developed countries to that milestone in 1961.It was a huge accomplishment for a small nation, one that helped pave Venezuela's development as an oil power and fueled hopes that a model to stamp out malaria across the globe was at hand. Since then, the world has dedicated enormous amounts of time and money to beating back the disease, with deaths plummeting by 60 percent in places with malaria in recent years, according to the WHO.But in Venezuela, the clock is running backward. The country's economic turmoil has brought malaria back, sweeping the disease out of the remote jungle areas where it quietly persisted and spreading it around the nation at levels not seen in Venezuela for 75 years, medical experts say.It all starts with the mines. With the economy in tatters, at least 70 000 people from all walks of life have been streaming into this mining region over the past year, said Jorge Moreno, a leading mosquito expert in Venezuela. As they hunt for gold in watery pits, the perfect breeding ground for the mosquitoes that spread the disease, they are catching malaria by the tens of thousands.Then, with the disease in their blood, they return home to Venezuela's cities. But because of the economic collapse, there is often no medicine and little fumigation to prevent mosquitoes there from biting them and passing malaria to others, sickening tens of thousands more people and leaving entire towns desperate for help.The economic breakdown has ""triggered a great migration in Venezuela, and right behind it is the spread of malaria,"" said Dr Moreno, a researcher at a state-run laboratory in the mining region. ""With this breakdown comes a disease that is cooked in the same pot.""Once out of the mines, malaria spreads quickly. 5 hours away in Ciudad Guayana [Bolivar state], a rusting former industrial boomtown where many are now jobless and have taken to wildcatting in the mines, a crowd of 300 people packed the waiting room of a clinic in May [2016]. All had symptoms of the disease: fevers, icy chills, and uncontrollable tremors.There were no lights because the government had cut power to save electricity. There were no medicines because the Health Ministry had not delivered any. Health workers administered blood tests with their bare hands because they were out of gloves.[MS] clutched her 23-year-old son as he trembled, unable to speak. [JC] held his 18-month-old daughter as she screamed. [GB], who works at the clinic, waved her hands helplessly and told yet another patient to hold on a bit longer. The pills had run out. There was nothing she could do. ""Come back tomorrow at 10 am,"" she said.In the nearby town of Pozo Verde [Bolivar state], residents said malaria had swept in after miners began returning home sick, the government fumigators having vanished 2 years ago. Now, the public high school has become an incubating ground of its own: a quarter of its 400 students have contracted malaria since November [2015].""You would think we would do something -- a cordon, a quarantine,"" said Arebalo EnrÌ quez, the principal of the school, who contracted malaria, as did his wife, mother, and 7 other members of his family.Officially, the spread of malaria in Venezuela has become a state secret. The government has not published epidemiological reports on the disease in the past year, and it says there is no crisis.But the most recent internal figures, obtained by The New York Times from Venezuelan doctors involved in compiling it, confirms a surge is underway.In Ciudad Guayana, hundreds of people, all with symptoms of malaria, overflowed a clinic in May [2016]. In the 1st 6 months of the year [2016], malaria cases rose 72 percent, to a total of 125 000, according to the figures. The disease cut a wide path through the country, with cases present in more than half of its 23 states. And among the malaria strains present here is _Plasmodium falciparum_, the parasite that causes the most fatal form of the disease.""It is a situation of national shame,"" said Dr JosÌ© Oletta, a former Venezuelan health minister who lives in the capital, Caracas, where malaria cases are now appearing, too. ""I was seeing this kind of thing when I was a medical student a half-century ago. It hurts me. The disease had disappeared.""In El Dique, a rural town where malaria was largely unknown until 2 years ago, [JG], 66, sat outside her home, newly widowed since her husband fell ill with the disease and died. She hardly spoke or moved from her chair. Inside [her daughter's] adobe home, her 2 sons were fighting malaria, too. Almost like clockwork, their fevers began in the morning: at 8 am for [the 8-year-old]; at 11 for [the 7-year-old]. The family has found no medicine. The boys have only painkillers.The illegal mines spill out over dozens of miles, leaving a pockmarked stretch of earth where the jungle gives way to countless craters and scars.Some are no more than tiny pools where 2 men sift the mud with pans, like a scene from the California goldfields more than a century ago. Others drain wide marshes with tangled networks of tubes and pumps. In another spot, hundreds of wildcatters had dug out a gaping maw of red and white soil. It sinks 15 stories deep and runs the length of a football field. They call it Cuatro Muertos, or Four Dead Men.It was not supposed to be this way. The gold reserves were once controlled by a Canadian company before President Hugo ChÌÁvez expropriated them and pledged to use their profits to fund his Socialist-style revolution.But the expropriation followed the pattern of mismanagement and neglect that many others did during the ChÌÁvez era. The state eventually abandoned the territory around the mine, and the potentially lucrative profits. Wildcatters have moved in, and so have the armed groups that now call themselves the law here.But at least there is food. As the country convulses from food shortages and riots, as hungry mobs ransack grocery stores, restaurants and bakeries, the mining town of Las Claritas [Bolivar state], only a short drive from the mines, lives in a state of relative plenty.Restaurants offer full menus. Street markets are packed with fruit. Pickups drive by loaded with pumpkins. In a country where soap is in short supply, a dozen brands are on sale in a Chinese-owned grocery store, where 7 models of flat-screen televisions are also available. Miners dish out fat wads of their gold earnings in cash, which run through a bill-counting machine.The promise of a different Venezuela -- one where there is ample food and work that pays enough -- led [YG] to abandon a program to become a preschool teacher in Ciudad BolÌ var, the provincial capital, where unemployment is rampant. Instead, she headed to a ramshackle jungle camp, where she cooks for miners with one hand and cares for her 2 young children with the other. ""Here, you can get ahead,"" [YG] said, washing her 1-year-old daughter in a plastic bucket on the counter as she cooked. ""They charge you 2 grams of gold for medicine,"" she said. ""You pay what they ask.""Not everyone can find medication, even with gold earnings.Using gasoline and other chemicals to extract the gold, [JG, 20, who gave up his university studies in industrial engineering] earned 500 000 bolivars -- around USD 500 at black-market exchange rates, about 33 times the country's minimum wage -- during a lucky 2-week stretch. But when he got malaria this spring [2016], he did what many miners do: he returned to his hometown to recover, bringing the disease with him. ""Everything has its risks,"" he said.On the other side of the vast pit, [PP], 38, sat in a structure made of tree poles and tarp where he sleeps with 10 other miners. He tested positive for malaria twice in March [2016]. The 3rd time he fell ill, he did not bother to get tested. He, too, went back home -- to the provincial capital, Ciudad BolÌ var, where his mother eventually caught malaria, as well.Back in Las Claritas, at a table in a dark brothel that smelled of alcohol, sat a young woman with long black hair whose parents do not know she has turned to prostitution to make her living. She left the eastern city of MaturÌ n [Monagas state] 3 months ago when riots erupted because food had gone scarce. ""Before, you waited in line for hours, but you got something,"" said [A], who did not give her last name, ashamed of her work. ""But now there is nothing there."" Today she earns the equivalent of USD 40 when a miner wants to spend the night with her. More often, the money comes in increments of USD 8, when a customer wants to have sex and leave a short time later.Venezuela rose only after malaria declined. It was the 1920s and another resource had set off a bonanza -- the black gold of oil, discovered in massive supply. But a vast malaria hot zone, then 2/3 of Venezuela, stood between the country and its riches. The deadly scenes were later immortalized in ""Dead Homes,"" a 1955 Venezuelan novel about the rural epidemics of malaria and the waves of migration to the country's oil fields.Freeing the country of malaria became pivotal to Venezuela's development, said Dr Oletta, the former health minister. ""Only once malaria was gone, roads could come, industry,"" he said. ""This was a sick country, and when it got well, things changed.""That transformative effort was led by Dr Arnoldo GabaldÌ n, the former health minister who began one of the world's 1st large-scale efforts to eradicate malaria and who became a national hero during his age.Teams across the Venezuelan countryside built irrigation ditches to drain pools of standing water, distributed quinine, and constructed cinder block homes in rural areas so that mosquitoes had fewer places to breed. Dr GabaldÌ n founded a research center in the city of Maracay, outside of Caracas and itself a malaria zone at the time, to broaden the mission and train officials from Latin America and Africa.But it was his use of insecticides -- initially DDT, then other substances -- that began to turn the tide. The walls of nearly every rural home in the country were sprayed, a technique that killed mosquitoes when they landed to rest. Fumigators would leave an envelope showing the date they would return. By 1949, malaria deaths had fallen drastically: to 9 per 100 000 people from 300.By the time Mr ChÌÁvez assumed the presidency 50 years later and began to carry out his Socialist-inspired vision for Venezuela, the regimented system of Dr GabaldÌ n had long faded, though malaria still appeared to be confined to a few rural areas. But the restructuring of the economy under Mr ChÌÁvez and his followers, including a growing dependence on oil revenue and a system of currency controls restricting American dollars, would eventually change that.In 2014 and 2015, as oil prices collapsed and the government scrambled for money to pay for goods, services, and imports, there were long shortages of chloroquine and primaquine, 2 drugs used for _Plasmodium vivax_, the most prevalent malaria parasite in the Americas.By 2016, doctors said there were shortages of nearly all anti-malaria drugs, most notably a drug cocktail for the deadly falciparum strain that costs just several dollars for a full round of treatment. Though debilitating and even fatal, malaria is easily treatable with the proper medication.Dr Leopoldo Villegas, an international malaria expert in Bangkok, said the government also relied on outdated methods like outdoor fogging with insecticides, which had unproven effects on adult mosquitoes that transmit malaria. And because it was not publishing epidemiological reports of new malaria cases or deaths, it was unclear how much medicine was needed each year.""This is an emergency, this is an outbreak, and it's not being dealt with by the government this way,"" Dr Villegas said, adding that the Venezuelan government had repeatedly denied the extent of malaria's resurgence to international organizations that could help prevent its spread.Gustavo Bretas, a Brazilian malaria expert, said that Venezuela once trained people throughout the region in malaria prevention. But Venezuela's inability to contain its own outbreak means that it now plays the opposite role: it poses a threat to the countries around it, particularly Brazil, where there are also illegal gold mines.""It's starting to spill over into neighboring countries,"" he said, adding that the lack of government statistics made the extent of the problem hard to assess.Venezuela's Health Ministry did not respond to requests for an interview, including a letter delivered to its offices.Oscar Noya now works in Dr GabaldÌ n's old laboratory in Caracas under a picture of his mentor in a suit and bow tie. On a recent day, malaria patients once again sat on the steps, most having arrived from the mines. 15 had come on a recent morning; 12 of them tested positive for the disease.Dr Noya tries to make do without many vital drugs, like artesunate, listed by the WHO as an essential medicine for the treatment of severe cases of falciparum malaria. He has only 3 vials of it left. He needs 6 to treat a single patient with a serious case.One recent night, a gang entered one of his malaria laboratories and stole the computers, one of about 20 attacks this year [2016] against the Tropical Medical Institute where he works, Dr Noya said. He wonders if the groups are aligned with the government.""We believe this is no more than intimidation because we're not quiet and we won't be quiet,"" he said, referring to public advocacy about malaria and the spread of other diseases.Dr Noya put away his vials of artesunate as more patients gathered outside. He looked up with an air of desperation. ""Dr GabaldÌ n would have died of a heart attack if he'd seen what is happening,"" he said.Despite the constant churn of workers from across Venezuela, there is a clear order to the mines. It is enforced by an armed group known as the Union. One of the Union's bosses came to the mines years ago to work as a dentist. He still does. But the squads of patrolmen on motorbikes who dominate this place are the real source of his wealth and power. He sports gold chains, 2 gold teeth -- and brass knuckles made of gold.For all the challenges of keeping order, the boss said, malaria was even harder. ""On malaria, we are screwed,"" he said.The task of monitoring the disease seems to have been delegated to people like a state health employee named Miguel MartÌ nez, who sat at a lonely post a short walk from a brothel near the mines, examining blood samples from miners. Under his microscope, a dye had stained the malaria parasite a dark purple. The log beside him showed that half of the patients who had visited him that day had tested positive for malaria. Like many health workers in this country, Mr MartÌ nez was exasperated. ""Just as there are no rice and beans in this country, there are no medicines,"" he said.Evening approached at the mine, the time when the _Anopheles_ mosquito begins to feed. Dusk settled over a clapboard Pentecostal church, where parishioners speak in tongues, and past a red-and-blue circus tent promising alcohol and a strip tease.""Is the malaria really coming from the miners?"" asked [AF], 28, a miner who sleeps in a hammock between 2 poles beside the mine. ""But where else can we go to make money? The city? There is no food there.""Lately, many Venezuelans have taken matters into their own hands. 5 hours away in the newly infected town of El Dique, residents were collecting 100 bolÌ vars [about USD 10 at the official exchange rate] from each household to hire a fumigator to come spray their homes.In the mine, where malaria tests are sometimes unavailable, miners said they had developed an exam of their own: drink 2 bottles of beer. If a sharp pain is felt afterward in the liver, where the parasites reside, then the patient has malaria, the test goes. Health officials said the measure was futile. -- more[Byline: Nicholas Casey; Patricia Torres and Clavel Rangel contributed reporting]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The description of the spread of malaria from the mines to the cities of Venezuela is a classic example of reintroducing malaria by exposing large numbers of people who then move into previous uninfected areas.The description of the country's fight to control malaria from 1920 to the 1960s shows the efforts needed in terms of training, manpower, materials, and organizational skills. The story also demonstrates the government's lack of interest in reporting the problem.It will take decades for a new government to roll back malaria once it is established in new areas, especially urban areas of Venezuela. - Mod.EPMaps of Venezuela can be seen at <http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/americas/venezuela.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/29>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
