Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/hong-kong-updates-botulism-situation-89954/>Botulism is a rare but serious and potentially fatal paralytic disease. It is caused by a potent neurotoxin called botulinum toxin (BTX), which is produced by an anaerobic and spore-forming bacterium, _Clostridium botulinum_ found in the environment, soil and contaminated food.Botulism has been a notifiable infectious disease in Hong Kong under the Prevention and Control of Disease Ordinance (Cap. 599) since 14 Jul 2008. In May 2016, as suspected botulism cases related to injection of BTX were reported to the Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health, the clinical criteria of botulism were revised and adopted, in which, iatrogenic botulism was included as one of the categories of botulism besides foodborne, infant, wound and other botulism.Iatrogenic botulism was defined as ""the spread of BTX beyond injection site following injection of BTX for therapeutic or cosmetic purposes, and the patient develops symptoms of botulism such as generalized weakness, dysphagia, aspiration pneumonia, flaccid paralysis, respiratory muscle paralysis, and autonomic neuropathy etc.""So far, 11 probable cases of iatrogenic botulism were reported from 27 May 2016 to 4 Aug 2016 to CHP, affecting 11 women aged from 21 to 47 years (median of 39 years). The duration of symptoms onset ranged from 2 to 31 days after injections (median of 3 days) and the presenting symptoms ranged from neck weakness and dysphagia to generalized muscle weakness and breathing difficulty. Antitoxin was administered to 3 patients as they developed generalized weakness and had difficulty in breathing or swallowing to prevent further deterioration. All of them were in stable condition. A total of nine required hospitalization in Hong Kong and have all been discharged. None of the cases required mechanical ventilation.Investigation revealed that nine of them had history of BTX injection in different beauty centres in the Mainland, while 2 claimed that they had received the injection in Hong Kong at a commercial premise in Mong Kok and at home, respectively. Both cases receiving the injection in Hong Kong had been referred to the Police for necessary action and investigation. The latter case was found to have the injection in Shenzhen after investigation by the Police and thus 10 imported cases were recorded. As for the cases receiving the injection in the Mainland, relevant information was provided to the Mainland health authority for their follow-up investigations and measures.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[There now 11 cases, 10 of which were injected on the Mainland and 1 in Hong Kong. There is no reason to suspect that there will not be more. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/198>.]
