Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/london-reports-nearly-six-out-of-10-syphilis-cases-in-england-52462/>Health officials in England say the rate of syphilis diagnoses is 3 times higher in London than anywhere else in England. In 2015, nearly 3000 cases were diagnosed in the capital, accounting for 56 percent of all cases in England (5042), according to a new report published today [17 Aug 2016].Syphilis has been diagnosed in all 33 London local authorities and in 2015 most saw an increase in numbers. Cases of syphilis have been reported among heterosexuals and men who have sex with men (MSM). However, MSM are disproportionately affected by the infection. Despite representing around 2 percent of the London population, in 2015 MSM made up 90 percent of all syphilis cases. This group has seen an 18 percent increase in cases from 2014 to 2015 alone.This continued rise in syphilis cases in the capital suggests that too many Londoners are putting themselves at risk through unsafe sex. With cases of syphilis continuing to increase in recent years (since 2010, cases among Londoners have soared by 163 percent) PHE [Public Health England] is raising awareness of syphilis and reminding Londoners to practice safe sex, which prevents infection.Dr Yvonne Doyle, regional director for PHE London, said:""Worsening sexual health remains one of the biggest public health concerns facing London and it is worrying to see such alarming rises in syphilis year-on-year. Most cases of syphilis are treatable with antibiotics and it is preventable if you practice safe sex. ""We are seeing large increases in cases of syphilis among men who have sex with men and they now represent 90 percent of syphilis cases in London. Although diagnoses among heterosexuals in the capital are more stable they too continue to be higher than we would like given the effective preventative measures in place.""In London, we have excellent open access sexual health services providing free STI [sexually transmitted infection] testing and treatment, notification for the sexual partners of those diagnosed with an STI, and free provision of contraception. With these services available across the capital there is no reason for people to be taking unnecessary risks with their sexual health.""I hope today's report will further raise awareness of sexually transmitted infections including syphilis and drive home the messages about the importance of practising safe sex, which includes using condoms, regularly being tested and avoiding overlapping sexual relationships. All of these will reduce the risk of STIs .""Improving the sexual health of Londoners is a priority area for PHE London and we will continue to work with partners across the healthcare system to reduce the burden of poor sexual health in the capital.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The news article above reports on the continued rising incidence of syphilis in men who have sex with men (MSM) in the UK, especially in London.Some factors that could promote unprotected sex among MSM include engaging in sex only with partners perceived to have the same HIV status as one's own to avoid using condoms (serosorting), and taking pre-exposure (PrEP) or post-exposure HIV prophylaxis. These factors would allow transmission of syphilis, gonorrhea, and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs), without necessarily resulting in an increase in HIV infections.Other factors that could account for the rising incidence of syphilis include use of psychoactive ""party drugs"", multiple anonymous sex partners, use of Internet chat rooms to meet sex partners, and use of smartphone apps, such as Grindr and Tinder, that facilitate anonymous ""hookups"".Increased diagnostic testing for STIs in MSM could also contribute to the increased incidence of syphilis in 2015. The British Association for Sexual Health and HIV (BASHH) has made the following recommendation in 2014 (<http://tinyurl.com/zxl9ksb>): All sexually active MSM should be tested for STIs at least annually and MSM at high risk of STIs should be tested every 3 months.For discussions of syphilis, see my comments in prior ProMED-mail posts listed below. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/283>.]
