Times of India [edited]<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/dehradun/Mystery-disease-kills-3-infects-50-in-Uttarkashi-says-DG-alert-sounded/articleshow/53789358.cms>Over 50 people in a village in Mori, Uttarkashi have been infected by a ""mysterious"" disease, as per the state director general of health. Three children have already died due to the disease, triggering alarm across the department. A team of experts, doctors and paramedical staff has already been sent to the location, though blocked roads and landslides are obstructing their path. ""We are unable to understand the actual cause of the disease. It has remained a mystery so far,"" said the DG.Three girls have died from the disease in Levadi village of Mori block within a week. As per the villagers, many other girls have also fallen sick. As per the preliminary findings of the team, which finally reached the village on Saturday afternoon [20 Aug 2016], the disease has spread mainly among teenage girls.Due to the geographically challenging terrain, the team took time to reach the village, which is 18 km from the main road and only accessible on foot. ""We have directed the chief medical officer (CMO) of Uttarkashi to take instant action before the situation goes out of control. As per preliminary reports, patients are complaining about throat pain followed by itching and irritation in the eyes. Our team is battling shoddy infrastructure and bad weather just to reach the spot. We hope they will be able to solve the problem,"" said Dr SC Pant, director (in-charge) of health.""We are also surprised that only girls have been infected. No one has been able to control the spread of the disease due to two reasons: poor connectivity and absence of medical staff in the area. Most of the time, diseases just go unnoticed. This time, because the girls started dying, the administration woke up and started taking action,"" said Raghubeer Singh Rawat, husband of the pradhan of Levadi.The chief medical officer of Uttarkashi, Dr (major) BS Rawat told TOI [Times of India] that a clearer picture would emerge by Sunday. ""The prima facie report by the doctors in the village indicates these girls suffered some kind of throat infection or mumps. However, we have not been able to establish communication links with our medical team. Once they are back by Sunday we will know what actually happened,"" said Rawat.The 3 girls who died apparently tried to medicate themselves with herbs, which are suspected to have led to an adverse reaction. While one of the girls died after being brought to Doon Medical College and Hospital, the other 2 could not even make it that far. ""The disease is directly affecting the kidney of the patient, due to which the health team has gone on alert, and arrangement for instant nephrology care is being made at the hospital,"" said the medical superintendent.[Byline: Shivani Azad]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[There is very limited information given in the news report above describing the outbreak in an isolated village in Uttarkashi in northern India that is affecting more than 50 mainly teenage girls who complained of throat pain complicated by kidney disease. We are not told how they know that the kidneys were involved. This clinical pattern suggests post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis following group A streptococcal pharyngitis. More information would be appreciated on this outbreak from knowledgeable sources.Uttarkashi is a town and district in the mountainous state of Uttarakhand in northern India bordering the Tibet Autonomous Region of China to the north. Uttarkashi is home to a number of ashrams, many Hindu temples and pilgrimage centers, and also to the Nehru Institute of Mountaineering (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uttarkashi>). - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/321>.]
