Michigan DHHS[edited]<http://www.michigan.gov/mdhhs/0,5885,7-339--391701--,00.html>The Michigan Departments of Health and Human Services [MDHHS] and Agriculture and Rural Development [MDARD] today [19 Aug 2016] announced that there have been 8 human cases of influenza A variant viruses reported in Michigan. They have tested positive for influenza A H3N2 variant (H3N2v) and one person has been hospitalized and since released. All of the confirmed cases had exposure to swine at county fairs in Muskegon, Cass, and Ingham counties during July and August [2016], where sick pigs had also been identified.MDHHS and MDARD are working closely with local health departments, the healthcare community, and fairs to protect swine exhibitors and the public and identify any additional cases.Fair exhibitors and animal caretakers should be following proper biosecurity processes such as regular handwashing with soap and water, disinfecting wash areas at least once each day, and making sure it has time to dry thoroughly after being disinfected. Additionally, weight scales and sorting boards should also be disinfected. Use a 10 percent bleach/water mixture in combination with a detergent (dish or laundry soap) to increase effectiveness.In 2012, there were 6 H3N2v cases in Michigan and in 2013, 2 cases were confirmed. Human infection is thought to happen when an infected pig cough or sneezes and droplets with influenza virus land in someone's nose or mouth, or are inhaled. There also is some evidence that the virus might spread by someone touching something that has virus on it and then touching their mouth or nose.Symptoms of H3N2v infection in people are usually mild and similar to those of seasonal flu viruses, but as with seasonal flu, complications can lead to hospitalization and death. Symptoms include fever and respiratory symptoms, such as cough and runny nose, as well as body aches, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. Some populations are at higher risk of developing complications if they get influenza, including children younger than 5 years of age, people 65 years of age and older, pregnant women, and people with certain long-term health conditions like asthma, diabetes, heart disease, weakened immune systems, and neurological or neurodevelopmental conditions.The incubation period (the time it takes from exposure to illness) for this influenza is typically similar to seasonal influenza at about 2 days, but may be up to 10 days. Currently, there is no vaccine for H3N2v and the seasonal flu vaccine will not protect against H3N2v. Antiviral drugs are effective in treating H3N2v virus infections. Early treatment works best and may be especially important for people with a high risk condition.Below are some steps that you can take to protect yourself and prevent the spread of any illness:- anyone who is at high risk of serious flu complications and planning to attend a fair should avoid pigs and swine barns;- do not eat or drink in livestock barns or show rings;- don't take toys, pacifiers, cups, baby bottles, strollers, or similar items into pig areas;- avoid contact with pigs if you have flu-like symptoms; wait 7 days after your illness started or until you have been without fever for 24 hours without the use of fever-reducing medications, whichever is longer;- avoid close contact with sick people;- cover your nose and mouth with a tissue when you cough or sneeze; throw the tissue in the trash after you use it;- wash your hands often with soap and water; if soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand rub- avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth; germs spread this way;- if you are sick, stay home from work or school until your illness is over.While it does not protect against H3N2v, MDHHS recommends annual season influenza vaccination for everyone 6 months of age and older to reduce the risk of infection from other influenza viruses.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It seems that the case numbers have gone up since the last report [Influenza, swine (04): USA (MI, OH), human cases H3N2V 20160817.4420280]. All cases are reported to be related to definite exposure incidents with sick pigs at state fairs in 2 counties in Michigan state. The public health advisory such as the one available on the state department webpage can be helpful, but other actions may include information to be posted on site as posters or banners for public awareness and education.For more information about H3N2v, visit <http://www.cdc.gov/flu/swineflu/h3n2v-basics.htm>. - Mod.UBAThe state of Michigan can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/225>. A county map can be seen at <http://geology.com/county-map/michigan-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
