The Nation [edited]<http://nation.com.pk/national/22-Aug-2016/tick-borne-congo-virus-claims-another-life>A total of 20 people died because of Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) in the country this year [2016] including 12 patients from Balochistan, 5 from Karachi while 5 suspected patients were registered in Hayatabad Medical Complex in Peshawar. The latest victim, a woman, who was brought from Afghanistan for medical treatment, died of the virus at Fatima Jinnah TB Sanatorium Hospital in Quetta.As people have started visiting cattle markets ahead of Eidul Azha for search of sacrificial animals, health experts said that due to lack of precautionary measures the virus could spread throughout the country and it may infect more people in the upcoming days.According to the data around 12 people so far died from Congo virus in Balochistan, 5 were from Karachi, 2 from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and 2 from Bahawalpur this year [2016].According to the report of Hayatabad Medical Complex Peshawar from January to August 2016, the hospital received 5 suspected patients of Congo virus out of which 3 tested positive while 2 patients tested negative; 1 patient was from Afghanistan, 1 from Khyber Agency while 3 patients were from Bannu. The report said that 2 of the patients died.The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Health Department has already sent directives to all the Medical Teaching Intuition (MTI) and all the Districts Headquarter Hospitals (DHOs) and the concerned District Coordination Officers (DCOs) to take tangible steps for the eradication of Congo virus in their concerned districts and hospitals. An official of the health department said that health department has already issued notification to the concerned officials to take practical steps regarding Congo virus. He further said that the department also directed the concerned hospitals and its medical directors to established isolated ward for Congo [CCHF] patients in the hospitals, adding that the mortality ratio of Congo [CCHF] in the country is from 35 to 50 percent.He informed that the concerned DCOs of the province have been directed to visit cattle markets and constitute a committee which will ensure the vaccination of animals as well as ensure the farmers to inform them about the precautionary measure from Congo virus. He also added that all the concerned hospitals and its staff and the district administration were directed to make SOPs regarding Congo virus as well as ensure the health staff training regarding the Congo virus. He said that health department already published some public messages and placards inscribed and written precautionary measures regarding Congo virus and it will be distributed in public places and cattle markets for awareness.Hayatabad Medical Complex Isolation Ward In-charge Dr Imran told The Nation that Congo fever [CCHF] is caused by the bite of an infected tick. ""When an infected tick bites an animal, usually a goat or sheep, the animal gets infected by developing fever.""He further said that the virus is circulating in blood of the infected animal; any person who is slaughtering it can get infection. He informed that as most of the patients of Congo disease were brought from Afghanistan and special measures are also needed to establish a vaccination center for Animals when crossing the border. He pointed out that special precautionary measures should be taken by the health experts while dealing with Congo [CCHF] patients as well as people who are dealing or buying sacrificial animals.The woman that died in Quetta on Sun [21 Aug 2016] day was brought from Afghanistan. The hospital sources said that F.B., a patient suffering from Congo virus was brought at the sanatorium from Afghanistan 3 days back and died on Sun [21 Aug 2016]. ""F.B. died of excessive bleeding due to Congo virus which caused her death"", said, Dr Mukhtar, a senior doctor at Quetta's Fatima Jinnah TB Sanatorium Hospital.He said that total of 84 patients suspicious of suffering from Congo virus were brought to the hospital. ""We sent blood samples of the patients to Agha Khan Hospital Laboratory in Karachi and 22 of 84 were confirmed to be infected with Congo virus,"" he said. ""9 of 22 patients including F.B. have died of the disease this year [2016]."" Dr Mukhtar said that most of patients brought at Fatima Jinnah TB Sanatorium belonged to Afghanistan. He, however, said that locally Congo virus has also been reported in different districts of Balochistan including Quetta this year [2016].Dr. Abbas Notkani, Chief Medical Officer at Fatima Jinnah TB Sanatorium said that 3 patients including F.B. and H. were under treatment at the hospital. H. was also brought from Afghanistan. He said that blood samples of a 3rd patient had been sent to Agha Khan Hospital Laboratory for diagnosis, of which reports were awaited.[Byline: Nader Buneri]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Citizens asked to adopt Congo preventive measuresDate: Mon 22 Aug 2016Source: The Nation [edited]<http://nation.com.pk/islamabad/22-Aug-2016/citizens-asked-to-adopt-congo-preventive-measures>Health experts have advised the citizens to take special preventive measures to protect from carrying Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF). According to them, healthcare workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Congo virus, or handling specimens from them, should implement standard infection control precautions. These include basic hand hygiene, use of personal protective equipment, safe injection practices and safe burial practices.Dr Wasim Khawaja, a public health specialist at Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS), said to reduce the risk of tick-to-human transmission people should wear protective clothing like long sleeves or long trousers and wear light coloured clothing to allow easy detection of ticks on the clothes. He said people should use approved chemicals intended to kill ticks on clothing, use approved repellent on the skin and clothing, regularly examine clothing and skin for ticks, if found, remove them and avoid areas where ticks are abundant and seasons when they are most active.Dr Khawaja said in order to reduce the risk of animal-to-human transmission people should wear gloves and other protective clothing while handling animals or their tissues in endemic areas, notably during slaughtering, butchering and culling procedures in slaughterhouses or at home. He added that to reduce the risk of human-to-human transmission in the community, people should avoid close physical contact with CCHF-infected people, wear gloves and protective equipment when taking care of ill people and wash hands regularly after caring for or visiting ill people.Medical practitioner at Federal Government Poly Clinic (FGPC) Dr Sharif Astori said the virus is primarily transmitted to people from ticks and livestock animals. He added human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. He said CCHF is a widespread disease caused by a tick-borne virus. The hosts of the CCHF virus include a wide range of wild and domestic animals such as cattle, sheep and goats. He said animals become infected by the bite of infected ticks and the virus remains in their bloodstream for about 1 week after infection, allowing the tick-animal-tick cycle to continue when another tick bites.Another health expert Dr Tariq Mahmood in Railways Hospital said the CCHF virus is transmitted to people either by tick bites or through contact with infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughter, he added. He said the majority of cases have occurred in people involved in the livestock industry, such as agricultural workers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians.Dr Tariq Mahmood said human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. Hospital-acquired infections can also occur due to improper sterilization of medical equipment, reuse of needles and contamination of medical supplies, he added.He said following infection by a tick bite, the incubation period is usually 1 to 3 days, with a maximum of nine days. The incubation period following contact with infected blood or tissues is usually 5 to 6 days, with symptoms including fever, muscle ache, dizziness, neck pain and stiffness, backache, headache, sore eyes and photophobia (sensitivity to light). Dr Tariq Mahmood said there may be nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and sore throat early on, followed by sharp mood swings and confusion. After 2 to 4 days, the agitation may be replaced by sleepiness, depression and lassitude, and the abdominal pain may localize to the upper right quadrant, with detectable hepatomegaly (liver enlargement). He said other clinical signs included fast heart rate, enlarged lymph nodes, and a rash caused by bleeding into the skin on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth and throat, and on the skin.Dr Tariq said there is usually evidence of hepatitis, and severely ill patients may experience rapid kidney deterioration, sudden liver failure or pulmonary failure after the 5th day of illness. The mortality rate from CCHF is approximately 30 percent, with death occurring in the 2nd week of illness. In patients who recover, improvement generally begins on the 9th or 10th day after the onset of illness.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Veterinary checkpoints suggested to prevent spread of Congo virusDate: Mon 22 Aug 2016Source: Dawn [edited]<http://www.dawn.com/news/1279044>Expressing concern over the increasing number of Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) cases in the country and the resultant deaths, experts have called for the establishment of veterinary posts at provincial entry points to make sacrificial animals free of the deadly tick-borne virus. According to media reports, Balochistan, Punjab and Sindh have reported 8, 2 and 4 deaths, respectively, from CCHF in recent months.""It's worrying to see deaths from CCHF and I believe that the virus is a major public threat this Eidul Azha, a time when animals arrive in city markets from different places in large numbers,"" said Dr MS Jaffery, a senior veterinary surgeon. He recommended the establishment of veterinary posts at provincial entry points to detect and curb the spread of the disease. ""I think this step should have been taken at least a month prior to Eid. However, it can still be done,"" he said.Referring to the treatment commonly applied abroad for making animals free of external parasites, he said that dipping and spraying methods had been found to be effective, which were part of regular cattle farm activities. ""In the dipping method, a bath is designed to immerse livestock in liquid pesticide. It is an efficient method to deliver pesticide or other liquid treatments to a large herd,"" he pointed out, adding that such practices were apparently non-existent in the country.Endorsing the idea of setting-up veterinary check-posts, the dean of faculty of veterinary sciences, University of Veterinary Sciences, Lahore, Prof Masood Rabbani said animal inspection at provincial entry points was important to contain the Congo virus threat. ""Apparently, the Congo virus threat has emerged from animals coming from Afghanistan. So there is a need for inspection and treatment at provincial entry points being used by a majority of transporters to bring animals,"" he said. According to him, the Punjab government has adopted this strategy and is actively pursuing it following the deaths from CCHF in the province. ""The same strategy is needed to be adopted in other provinces.""Apart from the spraying method, he said, an injectable medicine was available in the market for treating external and internal parasites. The same injectable was also being used for cattle management in the Gulf countries. ""However, such treated animals should be slaughtered after at least 8 days. Before that period, the meat may contain some residual effect of the medicine,"" he explained, suggesting that if this medicine was injected into animals, its use should be discontinued 10 days before Eid.Not all types of ticks were harmful to humans, he pointed out, adding that the _hyalomma_ species was found to infect humans. ""Since it's very rare, there is no need for panic. However, we do need precautionary measures in place,"" he said.To a question, he said animal-to-human transmission of the tick-borne Congo virus took place in 30 percent cases. ""It is a wrong perception that animals are the only source of transmission to humans. One can pick up the germ from a premises earlier used by animals carrying that tick. Usually, a tick leaves the host body after sucking its blood overnight. But, in filthy conditions, it may stay on the host body for unlimited amount of time.""Taking care of hygiene, he pointed out, was vital for the well-being of animals and humans. ""Though there is a need to have a strategy to check the spread of zoonotic diseases (infections that can be transmitted from animals to humans) throughout the year, the occasion of Eidul Azha is a high-risk period and provincial governments need to take active measures to check the spread of infectious diseases,"" he said.[Byline: Faiza Ilyas]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] CCHF Deaths in 2016Date: Mon 22 Aug 2016Source: Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/pakistan-reports-20-crimean-congo-hemorrhagic-fever-deaths-this-year-94057/>Health officials in Pakistan have put the death tally at 20 so far this year due to the tick-borne viral disease, Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), according to a report in The Nation today. This total includes 12 fatalities from Balochistan and 5 from Karachi. The remaining cases were from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Bahawalpur. Local hospitals have been made aware of the situation and isolation wards for CCHF patients have been established, hospital staff has received training for these patients and procedures have been updated.According to the WHO, Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a widespread disease caused by a tick-borne virus (_Nairovirus_) of the _Bunyaviridae_ family. The CCHF virus causes severe viral hemorrhagic fever outbreaks, with a case fatality rate of 10-40 percent.CCHF is endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East and Asian countries south of the 50th parallel north - the geographical limit of the principal tick vector. The hosts of the CCHF virus include a wide range of wild and domestic animals such as cattle, sheep and goats. Animals become infected by the bite of infected ticks and the virus remains in their bloodstream for about 1 week after infection, allowing the tick-animal-tick cycle to continue when another tick bites. Although a number of tick genera are capable of becoming infected with CCHF virus, ticks of the genus _Hyalomma_ are the principal vector.The CCHF virus is transmitted to people either by tick bites or through contact with infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughter. The majority of cases have occurred in people involved in the livestock industry, such as agricultural workers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians. Human-to-human transmission is possible.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The following guidelines for management of CCHF cases in humans and animals are available on the webpage for National Institute of Health Pakistan at the links; <http://nih.org.pk/files/Guidelines/CCHF%20guidelines%20September%202013.pdf>and <http://nih.org.pk/files/Guidelines/Prevention%20of%20Crimean-Congo%20Haemorrhagic%20(CCHF)%20Fever%20(Human%20and%20Animals)%20in%20Pakistan.pdf>The suspected cases must be evaluated based on relevant exposure history, clinical evaluation and supportive management while the laboratory diagnosis is confirmed. The disease is endemic to the country and the exposed or at-risk groups must be educated on the modes of exposure and when to report to a health facility. In this regard, a TV/paper media awareness campaign has also been recently initiated in Sindh province. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/140>.]
