EpiCore Global Surveillance Project members [edited]There have been many responses from Epicore members, for which ProMED is very grateful. It appears this outbreak of rash in children is likely chicken pox, but other causes of rashes may be occurring in adults.One response (prefers to remain anonymous) is: I have a friend who was supposed to see me in Ibadan Oyo State on Saturday 20th August but cancelled the visit when he received a phone call that his son was very sick in neighboring Lagos State, Nigeria. He later texted me by 20.34 on Saturday 20th August that his son had chicken pox. I will have to contact him to get some medical features and factors that led to a diagnosis Chicken Pox in his child in neighboring Lagos State. A second response (also prefers anonymity): Outbreak of chicken pox occurred in Edo state and some parts of Abuja it has been responded to and control measures have been put in place.One Epicore member stated that the State Ministry of Health's Epidemiology Unit has not had confirmation of chickenpox, but will investigate. Another stated the DSNO said there is nothing like such in the State. Another reported a case in a 23 month old baby in Lagos was confirmed as chicken pox. The infection of his child was from a 10 year old neighbor who is a playmate of his children. He stated that as far as he knows, his baby had taken all required vaccination to date but he does not know if it is a single or 2-dose vaccination. An outbreak of chicken pox occurred in Edo state and some parts of Abuja that has been responded to and control measures have been put in place.One additional Epicore response: The World Health Organization Office at Abuja and Ibadan contacted [and] do not have any information on the outbreak or reported cases. As at the time of this report efforts are being made to reach the Oyo State Ministry of Health for verification of the reported cases. Many Medical practitioners contacted got to know of this incidence from me. Member will update if there are new developments. Responding Member: Prof Louis Egwari Department of Biological Sciences, Covenant University, Ota, Ogun State, Nigeria--EpiCore Global Surveillance Project<http://epicore.org>[ProMED thanks all the Epicore members who submitted responses to this request for further information. - Mod LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/62>.]
