JawharaFM [in French, trans. Mod.AB, edited] <http://www.jawharafm.net/fr/article/nabeul-augmentation-du-nombre-d-animaux-atteints-par-la-rage/258/41757>Omar Sellimi, regional health director in Nabeul, said on Thu [18 Aug 2016] that the number of animals affected with rabies has increased in recent months. A total of 51 cases have been reported since the beginning of this year [2016] whereas, throughout the year 2015, only 62 cases were registered.He said also that 2 fatality cases were recorded during this year [2016] and that the disease has recently also affected cattle and donkeys. -- Communicated by: ProMED-MENA <promed-mena@promedmail.org>[The number of cases of canine rabies and human exposure is increasing in the Tunisian province of Nabeul, probably because of a slackening in the preventive measures against the disease. Among domestic animals affected, cattle and donkeys feature beside carnivores but do not act as major disease vectors. - Mod.AB]******[2] India, human. Audit of Post exposure prophylaxis, recoveryDate: 14 Aug 2016Source: Telegraph India [summarised, edited]  <http://www.telegraphindia.com/1160815/jsp/nation/story_102557.jsp#.V7HS25iLTIU>Many victims of dog bites across India develop rabies because of improper post-bite immunisation practices, an audit by scientists at the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences [Nimhans] has suggested.The audit of 128 suspected human rabies cases from 11 states has found that many bite victims who sought treatment did not receive the standard prescribed immunisation procedures and remained partially-immunised and thereby susceptible to rabies.The exercise has also indicated that some of these partially-immunised rabies patients end up as rare survivors, although with severe brain damage, thanks to aggressive supportive treatment with drugs that act on the brain.The Nimhans researchers and doctors called to treat rabies patients in Haryana, Goa and Maharashtra have documented at least 5 survivors over the past 5 years. The number is surprising because almost all patients with rabies -- a viral infection that spreads through the bites of dogs and other animals -- are expected to die within days or weeks.This is what makes post-bite immunisation crucial. The immunisation procedures seek to exploit the slow pace at which the rabies virus spreads through the body. The virus infects only nerve cells and can take anywhere from days to months to move from the site of the bite to the brain, where it causes inflammation, or encephalitis, that leads to death.Standard treatment requires the bite victims to be injected as soon as possible with rabies immunoglobulin (RIG), a substance that helps neutralise the virus near the bite wounds in the early hours after the bite. This is followed by 4 or 5 doses of the anti-rabies vaccine to be taken on the day of the bite, and on the 3rd, 7th, 14th and 28th day of the bite.But RIG is not widely available in India, and a significant proportion of patients do not receive it. The Nimhans audit also found that 13 among 24 laboratory-confirmed patients with rabies had received 3 to 5 doses of post-bite vaccinations and that at least 10 of the 24 had not received RIG at all.All but 3 of the 24 patients were dog-bite victims. The exceptions were a 45-year-old woman bitten on her toe by a mongoose, a 15-year-old girl scratched on her nose by a cat, and a 47-year-old man bitten on his hand by a monkey.""Deviations from standard treatment guidelines may explain why even vaccinated people get rabies,"" Reeta Subramanian Mani, associate professor of neurovirology at the Nimhans, who led the audit, told The Telegraph.But, she said, most of the estimated 20 000 patients who die every year from rabies in India do not receive any vaccinations.Medical experts assert that almost all bite victims who receive timely and adequate immunisation do get protected from rabies. But anecdotal evidence suggests some patients do not receive RIG and vaccines at the appropriate sites, highlighting the lack of awareness among even health personnel.""The RIG should be injected at the site of every bite; it should infiltrate tissues near each bite wound to neutralise any virus there. But some patients receive RIG injections near their hips or on their thighs,"" Mani said.""On the other hand, the anti-rabies vaccines should be given on the arm in adults and on the thighs in young children, and never on the buttocks where the higher levels of fat may slow down the immunisation process. Yet some patients get the vaccines on their buttocks.""Such deviations can leave bite victims only partially immunised, which might explain why they get rabies. But Mani and neurologists believe such partial immunisation when coupled with rigorous therapy with neurological drugs may explain the emergence of survivors.The Nimhans audit was published in the research journal Tropical Medicine and International Health. Mani has proposed her explanation in a paper published in the journal PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.Neurologists caution that survival from rabies is not equivalent to recovery.""Most do not survive, and those who do, survive in a bad state,"" said Vrajesh Udani, a senior consultant neurologist at the Hinduja Hospital, Mumbai, who has treated 2 survivors over the past 5 years.Rabies survivors have severe brain damage that leaves them bedridden and unable to move or speak. Most of them have to be tube-fed.The Nimhans paper comes amid longstanding concerns among health experts about municipal authorities' failure to curb the country's stray dog population.Shortages of personnel and funds have hobbled civic bodies' efforts to catch, sterilise and release stray dogs. India's 2012 livestock census estimated a nationwide population of more than 17 million stray dogs.""Why should this country have stray dogs at all?"" asked the mother of a 14-year-old survivor who had developed rabies in December 2012 a few weeks after being bitten by a dog while playing football in a western Indian town.Since his illness began, the boy has been lying in bed. He can now swallow the mashed morsels of food and spoonfuls of water she places in his mouth.While doctors view the emergence of survivors as encouraging, they caution that this should not shift the emphasis from prevention. ""Improving survival rates is a research issue,"" said Bangalore Mahendra, a community medicine specialist in Mandya, Karnataka. ""The focus should be on prevention  through proper washing of bite wounds and proper immunisation after bites, and through the control of the dog population.""But neurologists are hoping the emergence of survivors will spur efforts to save others. ""Patients with rabies traditionally used to have miserable deaths; they were placed in isolation; their laryngeal spasms prevent them from being able to drink water, despite thirst, they go into coma or their hearts stop,"" said Abi Manesh, a neurologist at the Christian Medical College, Vellore, who had treated rabies patients.""The current therapeutic strategy involves sedating patients into a coma-like state to dampen their brain activity, while we wait for the immune system to fight the virus,"" Manesh told this newspaper.The procedure is based on a protocol pioneered by a US-based paediatrician Rodney Willoughby, who in 2004 had helped a teenager in Wisconsin to become the first human rabies patient known to survive without receiving the anti-rabies vaccinations.Patients in the induced coma-like state may need breathing support and the effort to save them costs Rs 6 to 8 lakh [RS 600 000-800 000 or USD 9000-12 000]. ""The chances of survival are low,"" Manesh said. ""But it helps provide closure to families; they can tell themselves they did their best to save their loved one.""[Byline: G.S. Mudur]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Subscribers are referred to the recent posting 20160813.4414131, discussing shortage of human rabies immunoglobulin (HRIG) in South Africa, and suggested alternate PEP regime. Recovery of a human victim was discussed in 20150110.3083152. - Mod.AS]******[3] Human, Bangladesh: Quack medicine, lessons learned Source: The Daily Star [edited] <http://www.thedailystar.net/health/learning-the-cruel-death-fatima-1269331>A schoolchild named Fatima who was in Class 3, died of rabies on 2 Aug 2016. The father of Fatima went to the Upazilla Health Complex; the authority ordered them to leave the facility because this was an infectious ailment and told them that there was no treatment for it. The Infectious Disease Hospital (IDH), Fouzderhat referred her to the Infectious Disease Hospital, Dhaka for better treatment. The poor father tried his best to save his girl from the vicious disease. He could not afford the cost of the treatment. So he was supported by his fellow villagers and resorted to ""taking out the poison"" from her body. They invited Batuni Baidya, a village quack who believes in spiritual power to heal, who tried to take the poison out from Fatima's body. The quack tried many harmful practices and ultimately Fatima surrendered to death.The digital age has not been able to teach us the things we have to do in this situation. If the people of the village were aware about rabies and its symptoms, Fatima would not have left us so early. Fatima is a recent example, but thousands of people are passing away in silence.Rabies is a preventable viral disease. The rabies virus infects the central nervous system and causes disease in the brain. There is no effective treatment, and once symptoms start, death is inevitable. The rabies virus is transmitted from infected animals to humans through scratches, bites or licks on mucous membranes of the lips or eyes. The virus cannot be transmitted through intact skin so touching, petting or being close to the animals is not a risk. In addition to dogs, many other animals can transmit rabies.If preventative treatment is sought promptly, rabies need not be fatal. Immunisation is almost always effective if started within 2 days of the bite. Chance of effectiveness declines, however, the longer the vaccination is put off. It is important to start immunisation even if it has been weeks or months following a suspected rabid animal bite, because the vaccine can be effective even in these cases. If immunisation does not prove effective or is not received, rabies is nearly always fatal within few days of the onset of symptoms.According to IDH, the annual numbers of rabies related deaths were 167 in 2006, coming down to only 72 up to September 2014. However, a large number of rabies deaths are unreported.A national rabies prevention and control center, established at IDH, receives about 350 to 450 patients with dog bites daily. Anti-rabies vaccines are distributed free of charge from this center. In addition, there are 65 rabies prevention and control centers at the district level in Bangladesh. However, there are many challenges facing the total eradication of rabies.Mass vaccination of 1.2 million dogs has remained as one of them, because massive killing of stray dogs was banned by the Supreme Court in Bangladesh in 2011. Before the writ, the government used to have plan of massive killings of the stray dog population, but that has been stopped.On this issue Dr. Abu Jamil Faisel, Country Representative of EngenderHealth, Bangladesh recommends the following steps:Vaccinate the pets: one should ensure that one's pets are regularly vaccinated against rabies; it is a legal requirement. Dogs and cats should be given vaccine at 3 months of age, a booster within the following 9 months, and every 3 years thereafter. In high risk areas, yearly vaccinations are recommended. If you are not sure whether your pet has been vaccinated, or if overdue for a vaccine, then visit your local veterinarian immediately.Avoid being bitten: Not every bite poses a risk of rabies, but a bite or scratch from a stray animal, sick animal and an animal that is behaving strangely or an unprovoked attack would suggest a rabies risk. Never handle stray animals or animals that appear sick.Sterilisation of pets: Vasectomy is an accepted way to sterilise stray male dogs without impacting hormonal changes. It will prevent the ever growing population of stray dogs. After vasectomy, the stray dog should be vaccinated.If the government takes proper measures to control rabies with the above mentioned steps, then unwanted deaths will decrease and thousands of Fatimas will not face such a premature and cruel death. [Byline: M Alam Nuri]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Statistics on rabies in humans have been submitted by Bangladesh to the OIE for 2014: 97 (fatal) cases. For other recent years, the disease has been reported as ""present."" - Mod.ASHealthMaps:Tunisia: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/71>India: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/142>Bangladesh: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/153>]
