EpiCore Volunteer Mandy McBroom, UT Southwestern Medical Center- Florida (Miami) imported. 22 Aug 2016. (conf.) mother infected in Venezuela (Margarita Island) at end of 1st trimester of pregnancy. Baby with no microcephaly but with some brain calcifications and mild retinal changes (can be seen in the video at this URL).<http://www.local10.com/health/zika-virus/south-florida-doctors-treat-baby-girl-born-with-zika-virus>- New York (New York City). 16 Aug 2016. (conf.) 49 pregnant women positive for Zika virus infection, all acquired in countries where transmission was occurring ,  of these 1 baby born with microcephaly.<http://www.vosizneias.com/247044/2016/08/16/new-york-in-nyc-49-pregnant-women-had-zika-1-baby-born-with-defect/>- Texas (El Paso). 15 Aug 2016. (conf.) one man infected in Florida became ill in Texas - the 1st case of interstate travel of an infected individual in the continental USA. http://www.jwatch.org/fw111927/2016/08/17/texas-zika-patient-acquired-virus-miami- Diagnostic for USA. 18 Aug 2016. (reported) On 17 Aug 2016, FDA issued (PDF, 528 KB) an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for emergency use of InBios International, Inc.'s ZIKV Detect‰ã¢ IgM Capture ELISA for the presumptive detection of Zika virus IgM antibodies in human sera. This is the 1st commercially available serological test for Zika available under EUA (the 1st serological test, the CDC Zika MAC-ELISA, was initially authorized for use in February 2016). An EUA is a tool FDA can use to allow the use of certain medical products for emergencies based on scientific data. Including the ZIKV Detect‰ã¢ IgM Capture ELISA, FDA has issued 9 EUAs for Zika diagnostic tests, as of August 18, 2016.<http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/EmergencySituations/ucm161496.htm>- Territories and CommonwealthAmerican Samoa 0 imported 44 locally acquiredPuerto Rico 34 imported 7855 locally acquiredUS Virgin Islands 1 imported, 101 locally acquiredTotal locally acquired 8000[A map of the USA showing the states mentioned above can be accessed athttp://www.mapsofworld.com/usa/.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>andRoland HubnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgiumroland.hubner@sante.belgique.be******[2] Placental infectionDate: Thu 18 Aug 2016Source: JCI Insight. 2016;1(13):e88461. doi:10.1172/jci.insight.88461 [edited]<http://insight.jci.org/articles/view/88461?key=2677e2cbdd867c383f9d>Kellie Ann Jurado, Michael K. Simoni, Zhonghua Tang, Ryuta Uraki, Jesse Hwang, Sarah Householder, Mingjie Wu, Brett D. Lindenbach, Vikki M. Abrahams, Seth Guller, and Erol Fikrig. AbstractThe strong association of Zika virus infection with congenital defects has led to questions of how a flavivirus is capable of crossing the placental barrier to reach the fetal brain. Here, we demonstrate permissive Zika virus infection of primary human placental macrophages, commonly referred to as Hofbauer cells, and placental villous fibroblasts. We also demonstrate Zika virus infection of Hofbauer cells within the context of the tissue ex vivo using term placental villous explants. In addition to amplifying infectious virus within a usually inaccessible area, the putative migratory activities of Hofbauer cells may aid in dissemination of Zika virus to the fetal brain. Understanding the susceptibility of placenta-specific cell types will aid future work around and understanding of Zika virus-associated pregnancy complications.DiscussionAs primary human trophoblast cells of term placentas appear to be resistant to a productive ZIKV infection, at least at early time points (up to 72 hours), breaching of the maternal-fetal barrier appears to be necessary for vertical transmission to transpire. Potential means by which virus can be transmitted across the maternal-fetal barrier are diverse and may occur actively (exploiting a mechanism normally used to provide maternal aid to the fetus) or entail a passive event (surface tension resulting in breaks in the syncytium). Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), a well-described causative agent of congenital birth defects, has been found to co-opt the neonate Fc receptor-mediated IgG transport pathway (FcRn) to gain access into the fetal compartment by interacting with low neutralizing anti-HCMV maternal antibodies. DENV is hyperendemic in regions in which microcephaly has been associated with ZIKV infection, and DENV antibodies are known to have high serological cross-reactivity with ZIKV. It is intriguing to consider that preexisting circulating DENV antibodies within the mother could promote maternal antibody-mediated transcytosis of ZIKV across the resistant trophoblast layers to regions in which ZIKV-permissive cells (macrophages/fibroblasts) are actively surveying for signs of pathogens. These susceptible cells then serve as reservoirs for ZIKV within the placental compartment. We are currently developing models to test this hypothesis. If true, the congenital defects of ZIKV may be exacerbated within the Brazil outbreak by the presence of a population that has been previously exposed to DENV infections.SummaryIn summary, our data have shown that primary placental-specific fibroblasts and HBCs are permissive for ZIKV replication in isolated cultures in vitro while HBCs demonstrate susceptibility ex vivo in the context of placental tissues. Elucidation of the role that placental macrophages have during virus dissemination to the fetal brain will help our understanding of the pathogenesis of microcephaly and may lead to new strategies to prevent disease.--Communicated by:ProMED-mailpromed@promedmail.org[This study begins to get at the mechanism that permits Zika virus to cross the placenta with subsequent dissemination to the fetal brain.  The hypothesis that antibodies to dengue viruses may provide immune enhancement of Zika virus infection of placental cells is intriguing. - Mod. TY]******[3] Zika antibodiesDate: Fri 19 Aug 2016Source: Science Vol. 353, Issue 6301, pp. 823-826 DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf8505 [edited]<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6301/823>Karin Settler, Martina Beltramello, Diego A. Espinosa, Victoria Graham, Antonino Cassotta, Siro Bianchi, Fabrizia Vanzetta, Andrea Minola, Stefano Jaconi, Federico Mele, Mathilde Foglierini, Mattia Pedotti, Luca Simonelli, Stuart Dowall, Barry Atkinson, Elena Percivalle, Cameron P. Simmons, Luca Varani, Johannes Blum, Fausto Baldanti, Elisabetta Cameroni, Roger Hewson, Eva Harris, Antonio Lanzavecchia, Federica Sallusto, Davide Corti. Specificity, cross-reactivity, and function of antibodies elicited by Zika virus infection. Characterizing the Zika virus antibody responseGiven the public health emergency that Zika virus poses, scientists are seeking to understand the Zika-specific immune response. Stettler et al. analyzed 119 monoclonal antibodies isolated from 4 donors that were infected with Zika virus during the present epidemic, including 2 individuals that had previously been infected with dengue virus, another member of the flavivirus family. Neutralizing antibodies primarily recognized the envelope protein domain III (EDIII) or quaternary epitopes on the intact virus, and an EDIII-targeted antibody protected mice against lethal infection. Some EDI/II-targeting antibodies cross-reacted with dengue virus in vitro and could enhance disease in dengue-infected mice. Whether dengue and Zika virus antibodies cross-react in humans remains to be tested.AbstractZika virus (ZIKV), a mosquito-borne flavivirus with homology to Dengue virus (DENV), has become a public health emergency. By characterizing memory lymphocytes from ZIKV-infected patients, we dissected ZIKV-specific and DENV-cross-reactive immune responses. Antibodies to nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) were largely ZIKV-specific and were used to develop a serological diagnostic tool. In contrast, antibodies against E protein domain I/II (EDI/II) were cross-reactive and, although poorly neutralizing, potently enhanced ZIKV and DENV infection in vitro and lethally enhanced DENV disease in mice. Memory T cells against NS1 or E proteins were poorly cross-reactive, even in donors preexposed to DENV. The most potent neutralizing antibodies were ZIKV-specific and targeted EDIII or quaternary epitopes on infectious virus. An EDIII-specific antibody protected mice from lethal ZIKV infection, illustrating the potential for antibody-based therapy.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[4] Adult brain neuroprogenitorsDate: Thu 18 Aug 2016Source: Cell Stem Cell DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.08.005 [edited]<http://www.cell.com/cell-stem-cell/abstract/S1934-5909(16)30252-1>Hongda Li, Laura Saucedo-Cuevas, Jose A. Regla-Nava, Guoliang Chai, Nicholas Sheets, William Tang, Alexey V. Terskikh, Sujan Shrestra, Joseph G. Gleeson. Zika Virus Infects Neural Progenitors in the Adult Mouse Brain and Alters Proliferation. Highlights- Zika virus (ZIKV) can infect neural progenitors in the adult mouse brain- ZIKV-infected adult NPCs show evidence of cell death- Cell proliferation is also impacted in ZIKV-infected adult NPC populationsSummaryZika virus (ZIKV)-related neuropathology is an important global health concern. Several studies have shown that ZIKV can infect neural stem cells in the developing brain, but infection in the adult brain has not been examined. 2 areas in the adult mouse brain contain neural stem cells: the subventricular zone of the anterior forebrain and the subgranular zone of the hippocampus. Here, using 6-week-old mice triply deficient in interferon regulatory factor (IRF) as a model, we show that blood-borne ZIKV administration can lead to pronounced evidence of ZIKV infection in these adult neural stem cells, leading to cell death and reduced proliferation. Our data therefore suggest that adult as well as fetal neural stem cells are vulnerable to ZIKV neuropathology. Thus, although ZIKV is considered a transient infection in adult humans without marked long-term effects, there may in fact be consequences of exposure in the adult brain.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary  Marshall[It will be interesting to see the results of any neurological follow-up studies that determine if there are long-term effects of Zika virus infections in adult humans. - Mod. TY]******[5] Congenital brain abnormalitiesDate: Fri 20 Aug 2016Source: Radiology: Volume 281: Number 2 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2016161584 [edited]<http://pubs.rsna.org/doi/abs/10.1148/radiol.2016161584>Patricia Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld, MD, Deborah Levine, MD, Adriana Suely de Oliveira Melo, MD, PhD, Melania Maria Ramos Amorim, MD, PhD, Alba Gean M. Batista, MD, Leila Chimelli, MD, PhD, Amilcar Tanuri, MD, PhD, Renato Santana Aguiar, PhD, Gustavo Malinger, MD, PhD, Renato Ximenes, MD, Richard Robertson, MD, Jacob Szejnfeld, MD, PhD, Fernanda Tovar-Moll, MD, PhD. Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See Prenatally and Postnatally. PurposeTo document the imaging findings associated with congenital Zika virus infection as found in the Instituto de Pesquisa in Campina Grande State Paraiba (IPESQ) in northeastern Brazil, where the congenital infection has been particularly severe.Materials and MethodsFrom June 2015 to May 2016, 438 patients were referred to the IPESQ for rash occurring during pregnancy or for suspected fetal central nervous system abnormality. Patients who underwent imaging at IPESQ were included, as well as those with documented Zika virus infection in fluid or tissue (n = 17, confirmed infection cohort) or those with brain findings suspicious for Zika virus infection, with intracranial calcifications (n = 28, presumed infection cohort). Imaging examinations included 12 fetal magnetic resonance (MR) examinations, 42 postnatal brain computed tomographic examinations, and 11 postnatal brain MR examinations. Images were reviewed by 4 radiologists, with final opinion achieved by means of consensus.ResultsBrain abnormalities seen in confirmed (n = 17) and presumed (n = 28) congenital Zika virus infections were similar, with ventriculomegaly in 16 of 17 (94 percent) and 27 of 28 (96 percent) infections, respectively; abnormalities of the corpus callosum in 16 of 17 (94 percent) and 22 of 28 (78 percent) infections, respectively; and cortical migrational abnormalities in 16 of 17 (94 percent) and 28 of 28 (100 percent) infections, respectively. Although most fetuses underwent at least one examination that showed head circumference below the 5th percentile, head circumference could be normal in the presence of severe ventriculomegaly (seen in 3 fetuses). Intracranial calcifications were most commonly seen at the gray matter-white matter junction, in 15 of 17 (88 percent) and 28 of 28 (100 percent) confirmed and presumed infections, respectively. The basal ganglia and/or thalamus were also commonly involved with calcifications in 11 of 17 (65 percent) and 18 of 28 (64 percent) infections, respectively. The skull frequently had a collapsed appearance with overlapping sutures and redundant skin folds and, occasionally, intracranial herniation of orbital fat and clot in the confluence of sinuses.ConclusionThe spectrum of findings associated with congenital Zika virus infection in the IPESQ in northeastern Brazil is illustrated to aid the radiologist in identifying Zika virus infection at imaging.--Communicated by:MroMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[We hope that these findings are useful to radiologists in countries where Zika virus is being transmitted and pregnant women are infected. - Mod. TY]
