STAT [edited]<https://www.statnews.com/2016/08/22/yellow-fever-vaccination-next-outbreak/>The massive yellow fever vaccination campaign that got underway this month [August] in Angola and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) will help save lives in those countries. It is also serving as a dress rehearsal for how all nations can best cope with vaccine shortages, something we could see a lot more of in the years ahead.This latest outbreak of yellow fever began in Angola 6 months ago [published by WHO on 12 Feb 2016, it was notified by Angola to WHO on 21 Jan 2016 but the 1st cases were identified in December 2015; <http://who.int/csr/don/12-february-2016-yellow-fever-angola/en/>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]. The disease is caused by a virus that's spread primarily by _Aedes aegypti_, the type of mosquito that also spreads Zika, dengue, and other diseases. Although many people infected with the virus never develop any symptoms, some become severely ill and about half of them die. Worldwide, yellow fever kills between 30 000 and 60 000 people a year. There is no cure for yellow fever. That's why vaccination, which is highly effective, is so important.More than 18 million people in Angola and the DRC [Democratic Republic of the Congo] have been vaccinated against yellow fever since the outbreak started. That vaccination campaign temporarily depleted the world's global emergency stockpile of 6 million doses. It has also diverted doses away from campaigns to prevent yellow fever elsewhere in the world. That means there isn't enough yellow fever vaccine to handle the current epidemic and to prevent outbreaks elsewhere.We don't have time to make enough vaccine to immunize everyone in Kinshasa -- one of Africa's megacities with more than 10 million people -- before the rainy season starts in September, bringing out both _Aedes aegypti_ and potentially yellow fever in full force.To cope with this yellow fever emergency, the World Health Organization has taken the unusual step of recommending the use of fractional doses -- each person will get 1/5 of the normal dose. Although this makes it possible for more people to get vaccinated, it also offers challenges such as finding enough smaller syringes and training health care workers in different methods of preparing and performing the injection.Yellow fever is not highly contagious and is easily prevented with vaccines. The disease is thought to have evolved in Africa about 3000 years ago and was likely brought to the Americas by slave ships from West Africa.This isn't the 1st time that fractional dosing has been used. Much of the emergency smallpox vaccine stockpile in the United States is made up of fractional doses. With the rising risk of urban epidemics, and until emergency stockpiles reflect the size of that risk, fractional dosing may be the only way of ensuring that everyone is protected, not just those living in wealthy countries or countries with their own vaccine manufacturing facilities.And yet there are still important unanswered questions about fractional dosing. In the case of yellow fever, we don't know if fractional doses provide lifelong protection against the virus, as full doses do. Research suggests that fractional doses should provide protection for at least 12 months which, in the short term, may help prevent the spread of the yellow fever in Angola and the DRC and buy some time while vaccine stockpiles are replenished. The intensive vaccination campaign will provide crucial information on the duration of protection.Yellow fever comes and goes in humans because the virus also lurks in monkey populations. New outbreaks tend to begin along the edge of natural forest habitats when unimmunized individuals come in contact with mosquitoes that have bitten infected monkeys. In such situations, rapid outbreak response campaigns can be conducted in affected communities that create a wall of immunity around those infected and bring the outbreak to a quick end.But climate change is altering where and when disease-carrying vectors, like _Aedes aegypti_ live. Human settlements are encroaching on forested areas. Plus there's a global trend towards urbanization, with more people living closer together. The combination of these 3 changes creates a very real potential for larger outbreaks than we've ever seen before. That's why it is so important to vaccinate everyone in Kinshasa and elsewhere in Angola and the DRC.[Byline: Seth Berkley]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[It is essential that as close as 80 percent of the Kinshasa population be vaccinated before a wet season flare-up of yellow fever (YF) can occur. Considering the 11 million inhabitants, this is a formidable task. One hopes that with dose fractionation there is enough vaccine, appropriate syringes, and trained staff to provide that coverage.This situation raises a number of questions. If this is a dress rehearsal, will there be enough institutional memory to take advantage of the lessons learned in this YF outbreak and adequate political will to make the necessary institutional changes before the next outbreak? How large a YF vaccine stock should be maintained and who would pay for it? YF vaccine production in specific pathogen-free eggs is a lengthy process. Can a more efficient and rapid cell culture production system be developed, perhaps with a virus vector? And who would pay for that? Or, when this crisis is over, will we just go back to things as they were? - Mod.TYHealthMaps:Angola: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/165>DR Congo: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/194>]
