bdnews24 [edited]<http://bdnews24.com/bangladesh/2016/08/23/fertiliser-factory-tank-leaks-spreads-gas-in-chittagong-scores-fall-ill>At least 35 people have fallen ill by inhaling gas leaking from a tank of a diammonium phosphate (DAP) fertiliser factory in Chittagong's Anwara, police say.The gas has spread across to the other bank of the river Karnaphuli after the leak at the factory adjacent to Chittagong Urea Fertiliser Ltd (CUFL) factory on Monday night [22 Aug 2016].Mohammad Alamgir, OC [officer in charge] of Patenga Police Station, confirmed that the gas was spreading from the DAP factory.Locals at Patenga, EPZ [Export Processing Zone], port and other nearby areas said they can smell the gas.A resident of CDA [Chittagong Development Authority] in Agrabad, said he could smell ammonia. A Port Colony [Chittagong] resident said he smelt something acrid.Agrabad Fiore Service official Jasim Uddin said firefighters were spraying water around the affected tank to stop the gas from spreading further. He said one of the 3 tanks at the factory premises at Rangadia leaked.Chittagong Medical College Hospital Police Camp official Pankaj Barhua said at least 35 were hospitalised.An official of the DAP factory, requesting anonymity because he was not authorised to speak to the media, said the capacity of the leaked tank was 500 tonnes. ""People are working to plug the leakage,"" he said.Idris Ali, an associate professor at Government Hazi Mohammad Mohsin College's chemistry department, said exposure to ammonia could cause slackening, vomiting, and breathing problems.He recommended using protective masks.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Diammonium phosphate (DAP) is the world's most widely used phosphorus (P) fertilizer. It is made from 2 common constituents in the fertilizer industry and it is popular because of its relatively high nutrient content and its excellent physical properties.Ammonium phosphate fertilizers first became available in the 1960s and DAP rapidly became the most popular in this class of products. It is formulated in a controlled reaction of phosphoric acid with ammonia, where the hot slurry is then cooled, granulated, and sieved. DAP has excellent handling and storage properties. The standard grade of DAP is 18-46-0 and fertilizer products with a lower nutrient content may not be labeled as DAP.The inputs required to produce one ton of DAP fertilizer are approximately 1.5 to 2 tons of phosphate rock, 0.4 tons of sulfur (S), to dissolve the rock, and 0.2 tons of ammonia. Changes in the supply or price of any of these inputs will impact DAP prices and availability. The high nutrient content of DAP is helpful in reducing handling, freight, and application costs. DAP is produced in many locations in the world and is a widely traded fertilizer commodity.These are water-soluble compounds, which when exposed to water can liberate gas. DAP is one of a series of water-soluble ammonium phosphate salts that can be produced when ammonia reacts with phosphoric acid.Effects of overexposure to dusts can include irritation of the eyes and respiratory tract, pneumoconiosis (dust congested lungs), pneumonitis (lung inflammation), coughing, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and jaundice. Effects of overexposure may include irritation of the nose, throat and digestive tract, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, coughing, and shortness of breath.The article does not give us a lot of clinical signs but it is likely it was an inhalation of ammonia.- Persons exposed only to ammonia gas do not pose significant risks of secondary contamination to personnel outside the Hot Zone. Persons whose clothing or skin is contaminated with liquid ammonium hydroxide can secondarily contaminate response personnel by direct contact or through off-gassing ammonia vapor.- Ammonia dissolves readily in water to form ammonium hydroxide a corrosive, alkaline solution at high concentrations.- Ammonia's pungent odor and irritating properties usually provide adequate warning of its presence; however, olfactory fatigue can occur. Inhalation can result in fatalities.- Ammonia is highly irritating to the eyes and respiratory tract. Swelling and narrowing of the throat and bronchi, coughing, and an accumulation of fluid in the lungs can occur.- Ammonia causes rapid onset of a burning sensation in the eyes, nose, and throat, accompanied by lacrimation, rhinorrhea, and coughing. Upper airway swelling and pulmonary edema may lead to airway obstruction.- Prolonged skin contact is prolonged (more than a few minutes) can cause pain and corrosive injury.Acute exposure--------------Anhydrous ammonia reacts with moisture in the mucous membranes to produce an alkaline solution (ammonium hydroxide). Exposure to ammonia gas or ammonium hydroxide can result in corrosive injury to the mucous membranes of the eyes, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract and to the skin due to the alkaline pH and the hygroscopic nature of ammonia.Respiratory-----------The extent of injury produced by exposure to ammonia depends on the duration of the exposure, the concentration of the gas, and the depth of inhalation. Even fairly low airborne concentrations (50 ppm) of ammonia produce rapid onset of eye, nose, and throat irritation; coughing; and narrowing of the bronchi. More severe clinical signs include immediate narrowing of the throat and swelling, causing upper airway obstruction and accumulation of fluid in the lungs. This may result in low blood oxygen levels and an altered mental status. Mucosal burns to the tracheobronchial tree can also occur.Children may be more vulnerable to corrosive agents than adults because of the smaller diameter of their airways. Children may also be more vulnerable because of failure to evacuate an area promptly when exposed.Dermal------Dilute aqueous solutions (less than 5 percent) rarely cause serious burns but can be moderately irritating. Exposure to concentrated vapor or solution can cause pain, inflammation, blisters, necrosis and deep penetrating burns, especially on moist skin areas. Skin contact with compressed, liquid ammonia (which is stored at -28 deg F/-33.3 deg C]) causes frostbite injury, and may also result in severe burns with deep ulcerations.Ocular------Ammonia has a greater tendency to penetrate and damage the eyes than does any other alkali. Even low concentrations of ammonia vapor (100 ppm) produce rapid onset of eye irritation. Contact with high concentrations of the gas or with concentrated ammonium hydroxide may cause swelling and sloughing of the surface cells of the eye, which may result in temporary or permanent blindness.Gastrointestinal----------------Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain are common symptoms following ingestion of ammonia. On rare occasions, deliberate ingestion of household ammonia (5-10 percent) has resulted in severe esophageal burns. Ingestion of more concentrated ammonia can cause severe corrosive injury to the mouth, throat, esophagus, and stomach.Potential sequelae------------------Survivors of severe inhalation injury may suffer residual chronic lung disease. In cases of eye contact, ulceration and perforation of the cornea can occur after weeks or months, and blindness may ensue. Cataracts and glaucoma have been reported in persons acutely exposed. Ingestion of ammonia may cause permanent damage to the mucous membranes of the alimentary canal, with bleeding, perforation, scarring, or stricture formation as potential sequelae.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/mmg/mmg.asp?id=7&tid=2> and <http://tinyurl.com/ho6qnkn>. - Mod.TGMaps of Bangladesh can be seen at <http://tinyurl.com/bw2fuve> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/55106>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
