Deccan Chronicle [edited]<http://www.deccanchronicle.com/lifestyle/health-and-wellbeing/240816/fish-is-now-a-source-of-stomach-troubles.html>Histamine (which causes allergy and food intolerance) forming in fish species like tuna, Indian mackerel and sardine -- recently listed by Food Safety Authority of India under the category of ""fish species having potential to cause histamine poisoning"" -- is making its way into homes due to improper refrigeration and preservation in cities in Telangana including Hyderabad and in Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh.The Central Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had issued a notification amending the ""other contaminants"" list in which more than 130 fish species were named including at least a dozen native species of India that are also sold in AP [Andhra Pradesh?] and TS. Fish stalls and markets have been selling these fish that can potentially cause rashes and gastrointestinal problems if not refrigerated, posing a public health risk, warn experts.Hotels and restaurants also fail to refrigerate the fish properly, leading to food intolerance. In healthy fish, histamine is less than 0.1 mg per 100 gram but in samples of fish that lead to poisoning, histamine levels of at least 20 to 50 mg per 100 gram have been recorded. According to FSSAI experts, at room temperatures the histamine concentration rapidly increases.Transport to Hyderabad from Visakhapatnam and other coastal areas is not done properly in several cases. Even the ice used by fish stalls and units contain E-coli as inferior/impure quality of water is used to freeze into ice. Pathogens like _E.coli_ and _Klebsiella_ convert histidine present in fish tissue to histamine.General physician Dr J. Anish Anand said, ""We have not encountered any patient who has had histamine poisoning after they ate fish. However, we get patients with skin rashes and allergies after eating seafood and they are known to have previous histories of intolerance to fish and prawn. Western patients behave differently from South Asians on food allergies. Peanut allergies are common in the West but we seldom come across such allergies.""He added, ""But definitely there are issues with refrigeration and preservation. There [are] no standards and authorities to check properly on the kind of food restaurants serve and what fish the stalls sell."" Food Safety authorities do not lift samples of raw fish and do not have equipment to test histamine levels in fish. Mr. G. Vinod Dayal, deputy food controller, TS Food Safety department said, ""We lift samples of prepared food like biryani and test for chemicals.""[Byline: U Sudhakar Reddy]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[From this article, it does not appear that anyone has been affected. However, it would be easy without proper handling, and with contaminated ice for someone to acquire histamine poisoning or even a case of _E. coli_ or _Klebsiella_ bacterial infection.""What is scombroid fish poisoning?---------------------------------Scombroid fish poisoning is a syndrome resembling an allergic reaction that occurs within a few hours of eating fish contaminated with histamine. There are no specific diagnostic tests for scombroid fish poisoning in humans, and diagnosis is generally made based on symptoms and recent dietary history.What are the symptoms of scombroid fish poisoning?--------------------------------------------------Illness typically begins minutes to hours after ingestion of the toxic fish and resembles a histamine reaction. Associated symptoms include tingling and burning sensations around the mouth, facial flushing and sweating, nausea and vomiting, headache, palpitations, dizziness and rash. Some patients report that the implicated fish has a peppery or a metallic taste.How do people get scombroid fish poisoning?-------------------------------------------Fish in the Scombridae family (tuna, mackerel, skipjack and bonito) are the most common vehicles for scombroid fish poisoning. Other fish, however, have been implicated in scombroid fish poisoning, and include mahi mahi, bluefish, marlin, and escolar. When susceptible fish are not promptly and continuously refrigerated, bacteria can metabolize naturally occurring histamine to produce scombrotoxin, which consists of histamine and other amines. The presence of 50 parts per million (ppm) or more histamine in fish is indicative of decomposition whether or not there is gross evidence of spoilage, such as bad odor. When illness results from consumption, histamine levels in implicated fish have commonly been at least 200 ppm and often greater than 500 ppm. Histamine is heat resistant and can, therefore, cause illness even when fish is properly canned or cooked thoroughly. While some contaminated fish will not show any outward signs of spoilage, others will show such signs as a bad odor. Cooked fish that has spoiled may have a ""honey combed"" appearance.How is scombroid fish poisoning treated?----------------------------------------Scombroid fish poisoning is usually mild and duration is short, making treatment unnecessary. For more severe cases or inpatients with underlying medical conditions, oral antihistamines may be beneficial.How common is scombroid fish poisoning?---------------------------------------The occurrence of scombroid fish poisoning is worldwide. In California, scombroid fish poisoning is reportable; in 1999 and 2000, there were 17 and 26 cases of scombroid fish poisoning reported in California, respectively.""Portion of this comment were extracted from:<https://www.cdph.ca.gov/HealthInfo/discond/Documents/ScombroidFishPoisoningFactSheet.pdf >. - Mod.TGMaps of India can be seen at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/142>. - CopyEd.AO]
