Scroll.In [edited]<http://scroll.in/pulse/814188/too-many-platelets-is-killing-dengue-patients>A 24-year-old college student RG died in Kolkata last week. According to news reports, doctors at a Salt Lake hospital found that RG had had a platelet transfusion at a nursing home where he had been previously admitted with dengue. The doctors found that the student suffered blood infection and acute lung injury that led to septic shock and multi-organ failure. They also said that his platelet count had not dropped enough to warrant the transfusion of 18 units of blood that he received at the nursing home.With dengue rife across the country in the monsoon season, patients in many cities face this threat. In Mumbai for instance, the health department has similarly found that unindicated platelet transfusions are causing immune-based disorders that worsen the symptoms of dengue patients and in some cases even lead to death. The city corporation was forced to issue a circular last year [2015] asking blood banks and physicians to not offer platelet transfusions to any patient who has dengue. Their efforts seem to be paying off. A review by the Mumbai District AIDS Control Society, which governs blood banks in the city, found that the use of platelets dropped by 12% in 2015 following their circular.""The drop in the platelet usage shows that unnecessary platelet transfusions were taking place, which stopped after our circular,"" said Dr Shreekala Acharya from Mumbai District AIDS Control Society.Acharya and collaborators from the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation last week organised another meeting to review the situation and urged blood banks and doctors to continue the judicious use of platelets.According to the National Vector Borne Disease Control Program, 15 099 people have contracted dengue, and 26 others have died of the disease between January and July this year [2016]. Kerala has recorded the highest morbidity among states. Between January and June this year [2016], the state has recorded 4060 cases, with 5 people dying of the mosquito-borne infection. Public health experts have declared that these official numbers are just the tip of a morbid iceberg, since several cases and deaths go unreported.Dengue is a mosquito-borne infection spread by the _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes. A patient bitten by a mosquito infected with the dengue virus can develop the infection, which has no specific treatment. The dengue virus causes suppression of bone marrow, which manufactures blood cells. So a dengue infection leads to fewer blood cells being produced that in turn leads to a fall in the number of platelets in the body. Since platelets are also responsible for clotting, a very low count of below 20 000 causes bleeding complications, and this is when doctors usually prescribe transfusions.Since 2010, Mumbai has recorded 42 dengue-related deaths, and the civic body has started analysing the factors that could have caused these deaths. During the meetings of the committee, infectious disease expert Dr Om Shrivastav highlighted the excessive use of platelets in treating dengue patients. ""Each time a patient is given a platelet transfusion, the patient's own body starts making platelet antibodies,"" he said. ""Hence, when the patient actually needs platelets and is administered with it, the body's immune system gets to work. The additional platelets are chewed up by the body's immune system, which only worsens the patient's condition.""Shrivastav said that doctors often give platelet transfusions to patients when they don't really need them, leading to the consumption of close to 300 000 units of platelets in Mumbai in 2015. ""Owing to this practice, the transfusions don't work when the patient actually needs it,"" he added.A study by doctors at the Bangalore Medical College and Research Institute also highlights the unnecessary use of blood platelets. The study published in the International Journal of Clinical Cases and Investigations concluded that platelet transfusion does not appear to be necessary in all patients with dengue, even those with severe thrombocytopeni, a condition where there is bleeding in the tissues.To make sure that the new guidelines are followed, Mumbai's civic body asked doctors to maintain records of patients to whom they prescribe platelet transfusions and the reason for the prescription. Blood banks have also been asked to alert the health department if they receive too many requests of platelets from a specific doctor. Civic officials claim that this system, which has been in place since last year [2015], has helped them to control dengue mortality.This year [2016] so far, no dengue-related death has been recorded in Mumbai, according to the health department.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] Cardiac effectsDate: 24 Aug 2016Source: Health Newsline [edited]<http://www.healthnewsline.net/dengue-may-prove-deadly-heart-patients-research/2535821/>It is well known that dengue can make a person seriously sick, leaving him or her bed-ridden for weeks. But this mosquito-borne disease could be even more dangerous if contracted by a cardiac patient, a new study finds.In recent years, dengue has become a seasonal phenomenon in India, with a number of cases of dengue reported in the country every year. State and central governments as well as non-government organizations in the country are making every effort to curb the spread of dengue virus, but it continues to affect large numbers of the population.A research by experts at Fortis Healthcare Limited now warns that dengue can be deadly for heart patients, as it could aggravate their cardiac problems.The research study was conducted by Upendra Kaul, dean and executive director, Clinical Research and Academics, Fortis Healthcare Limited, in the last 3 months involving 150 dengue patients admitted to its hospitals in Delhi and NCR.""Our study shows that dengue can mean a double blow for heart patients, as the vector-borne disease could create serious cardiac problems in such patients,"" Kaul said. ""Also, very often heart patients are on aspirin. But, continuing with aspirin in these patients can be a dangerous situation as it reduces platelet counts in them and could also lead to bleeding.""The study also shows that electrocardiograph and echocardiograph (ECG & Echo) readings changed in those patients who were hospitalised for dengue fever but with no prior heart problems.""We found that those having heart problems were affected by dengue at large and hence creating a double challenge for us to treat them. Simultaneously, those who had dengue, their ECG & ECHO were showing some temporary malfunction of the heart. However, these were corrected with supportive treatment. But it is very important not to overlook any symptoms in both cases.""Of the participating dengue fever patients, 50 percent with no prior heart ailments exhibited temporary malfunction in their heart, which included atrial fibrillation, enhanced ectophy, and sinus bradycardia. Skipped heartbeats or rapid or forceful heartbeats were conduction abnormalities that were experienced by the patients in the study.Furthermore, 31 percent of dengue fever patients showed diastolic dysfunction, a heart condition in which the performance of one ventricle, the main chamber of the heart, declines.As per the experts, if someone has dengue fever and also experiences symptoms like chest discomfort, shortness of breath, unexplained fatigue, he/she must get ECG or ECHO done to clear the doubt about whether their heart is involved or not. ""Early detection can avert heart disease progression,"" Kaul concluded.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>
