ABC 7 Eyewitness News [edited]<http://abc7ny.com/health/exclusive-4-dead-dozens-sick-from-rhinovirus-at-westchester-vet-home/1486459/>Dozens of people at a local home for veterans have come down with the rhinovirus this month [August 2016], and 4 have died at the Westchester County [New York] facility.Over the last 3 weeks, a team of infectious control experts from the State Department of Health have been on the scene at the New York State Veterans' Home in Montrose, trying to bring the outbreak of the respiratory infection under control.The Eyewitness News Investigators have learned that nearly 1 in 4 of all patients at the 221-bed facility have come down with the fast spreading illness, which is a bad strain of the common cold.Health officials say that since 2 Aug 2016, there have been 58 cases, 4 of which resulted in death. 15 are still recovering, while 39 have fully recovered.""This is the 1st step state health must take to establish whether or not this does represent an outbreak,"" said Dr. Denis Nash, of the CUNY [City University of New York] School of Public Health. ""It does, on the face of it, seem like an unusual number of cases and deaths.""Dr. Nash, an infectious disease specialist, said the state must immediately assess the facility's standards and practices for infection prevention.""This is something that state health department is looking into very carefully,"" he said. ""As they are gathering all this information, marking any changes right away, as they need to, in order to stop any ongoing outbreak and also prevent future ones. ""A spokesman for the State Department of Health says they've been working closely with the Veterans' Home onsite to ensure that infection prevention and control measures are implemented to diminish the risk for infections.""If so many are affected by the same infectious disease, it does point to infection control issues,"" Dr. Nash said. ""And that's something the state will want to be looking at right away.""The Department of Health says there have been no new cases in days, and that they continue to work closely with the Montrose staff on cleaning the facility and infection control.Rhinoviruses are the most common cause of the common cold.--Communicated by:Sukie Crandall<sukie@mac.com>[Most people get colds in the winter and spring, but it is possible to get a cold any time of the year [as is the case in this report from Westchester County, New York, USA, where the infections have occurred in the summer]. Symptoms usually include sore throat, runny nose, coughing, sneezing, watery eyes, headaches and body aches. Most people recover within about 7-10 days. However, people with weakened immune systems, asthma, or respiratory conditions may develop serious illness, such as pneumonia.Many different viruses can cause the common cold, but rhinoviruses are the most common. Rhinoviruses can also trigger asthma attacks and have been linked to sinus and ear infections. Other viruses that can cause colds include respiratory syncytial virus, human parainfluenza viruses, and human metapneumovirus.Viruses that cause colds can spread from infected people to others through the air and close personal contact. You can also get infected through contact with stool or respiratory secretions from an infected person. This can happen when you shake hands with someone who has a cold, or touch a doorknob that has viruses on it, then touch your eyes, mouth, or nose.You can help reduce your risk of getting a cold:- Wash your hands often with soap and water. Wash them for 20 seconds, and help young children do the same. If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Viruses that cause colds can live on your hands, and regular handwashing can help protect you from getting sick.- Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands. Viruses that cause colds can enter your body this way and make you sick.- Stay away from people who are sick. Sick people can spread viruses that cause the common cold through close contact with others.Excerpted/edited from CDC (<http://www.cdc.gov/features/rhinoviruses/>)It is particularly important for people with colds to stay away from people who are aged, infirm, or immunocompromised in order to prevent transmission inadvertently to those most vulnerable.A map of New York State indicating location in the US can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/234>. - Mod.LK]
