The Denver Channel [edited]<http://www.thedenverchannel.com/lifestyle/health/boulder-investigates-first-resident-with-tularemia-in-2016>Boulder [Colorado] investigates 1st resident with tularemia in 2016-------------------------------------------------------------------A Boulder resident is suspected of being the 1st to contract tularemia in 2016, prompting warnings from health officials. Boulder County Public Health officials investigated last week the 1st case in Boulder County of tularemia, saying a 65-year-old is suspected of contracting the disease after showing symptoms of a fever, swollen lymph nodes and a skin lesion.The man reportedly mowed his lawn and worked with a woodpile before showing symptoms. Officials released a warning to the public, saying residents should be cautious while working outside of dead animals. Tularemia is transmitted by contact with dead animals, particularly through tick and deer fly bites, or skin contact with infected animals. Rabbits and rodents are most commonly carriers of the disease. Officials listed some top tips for avoiding contracting the disease: - Use a long-handled shovel to pick up dead animals, double bagging them to dispose of their bodies. - While working outside, use DEET-infused insect repellants. - Wash any cuts or scratches incurred from outdoors work as quickly as possible.- Don't let pets drink from groundwater. - Never mow over animal carcasses. See a doctor immediately if you quickly contract a fever or swollen lymph nodes after outside work. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[In 2015, 52 cases of human tularemia were reported in Colorado, more than 10 times the typical number of 0-4 cases reported annually from 1954-2013. The clinical manifestations of human tularemia depend on the route of entry of the organism into the body. Airborne _Francisella tularensis_ would mainly cause pleuropneumonitis. Exposures that penetrate broken skin result in ulceroglandular or glandular disease (""gland"" in this case referring to lymph nodes). The onset of tularemia is usually abrupt, with fever, headache, chills and rigors, generalized body aches (often prominent in the low back), coryza (inflammation of the mucous membranes lining the nasal cavity), and sore throat. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur. Sweats, fever, chills, progressive weakness, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss characterize the continuing illness. Some illnesses manifest as an undifferentiated febrile illness which is called the typhoidal form. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/4519>.]
