Eurosurveillance 21(34), Rapid communication [edited]<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22566>Cluster of human parechovirus infections as the predominant cause of sepsis in neonates and infants, Leicester, United Kingdom, 8 May to 2 August 2016--------------------------------------------------------------------------------[Citation: Tang JW, Holmes CW, Elsanousi FA, et al. Cluster of human parechovirus infections as the predominant cause of sepsis in neonates and infants, Leicester, United Kingdom, 8 May to 2 August 2016. Euro Surveill. 2016;21(34):pii=30326. DOI: <http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.34.30326>]We report an unusually high number of cases (n = 26) of parechovirus infections in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of neonates and infants admitted with sepsis in the United Kingdom during 8 May to 2 Aug 2016. Although such infections in neonates and infants are well-documented, parechovirus has not been routinely included in many in-house and commercial PCR assays for CSF testing. Clinicians should consider routine parechovirus testing in young children presenting with sepsis.Parechoviruses usually causes self-limiting, mild gastroenteritis and respiratory infections, though more severe neurological and cardiovascular complications are possible. We report a sudden and unusual increase in the number of cases of human parechovirus (HPeV) infection in neonates and infants admitted to hospital with sepsis during May to August 2016, in Leicester [England], United Kingdom (UK).The aim of this report is to alert other teams in Europe and elsewhere, who may not test for HPeV routinely, either in respiratory, enteric or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples, in neonates and infants admitted to hospital for respiratory illness, gastroenteritis or sepsis. ... - moreThis is in contrast to previous years: in 2015, one case was diagnosed (in July), in 2014, 10 cases were diagnosed over a 4-month period (between March and July), in the same hospital using the same assay and clinical testing algorithm. The unusual aspect of this cluster was the sudden appearance of multiple cases within this short 3-month period (May to August 2016).All 26 cases presented with very similar symptoms of generalised sepsis, including high fever (up to 40 degrees C), lethargy or drowsiness, poor feeding, tachycardia, grunting, mottled or petechial rash and irritability, with no other viral or bacterial agent found in systemic samples (i.e. by PCR testing or blood cultures).Background----------Parechovirus is a non-enveloped, single-stranded RNA virus within the family Picornaviridae, which also includes rhinoviruses and enteroviruses. There are at least 16 different human HPeV types, of which HPeV type 3 is the most common cause of clinical disease in humans [3]. The spectrum of disease (mainly for HPeV 3) can range from self-limiting mild gastroenteritis and respiratory infections to more severe neurological complications (acute flaccid paralysis, encephalitis) and myocarditis [4].Infections with HPeV in neonates and infants have been well-documented [5-10], but HPeV has only relatively recently been included as a target in our in-house and some commercial PCR assays used for testing CSF. This is most likely due to the growing recognition of HPeV as a common potential cause of sepsis and febrile seizures from various studies and outbreak investigations in recent years [11-16]. ... - moreDiscussion----------This increase in the number of HPeV infections associated with sepsis in neonates and infants is now being confirmed elsewhere in the UK, and viral sequencing analysis is currently in progress for samples from these 26 cases and others (David Allen, Public Health England, personal communications, July 2016). ...While no specific therapy is available, testing for HPeV as the cause of sepsis and/or encephalitis in these young children should be routine (along with testing for enteroviruses), even if the typical laboratory markers indicating sepsis may be relatively normal. This may reduce or prevent prolonged unnecessary empirical antibiotic treatment, thereby reducing the risk of antibiotic resistance arising, as well as optimising clinical care and the use of resources.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Parechovirus is usually spread from person to person through contact with respiratory droplets, saliva or faeces from an infected individual, thus it can spread very easily and consequently clusters of cases may be seen. There appears to be a broad spectrum of symptoms that range from mild to very severe.Read the full report at the URL above for more information, references, tables and figures. Also see Parechovirus infection - Australia: (QL) children 20160219.4035899 for further discussion of parechovirus infection.To access a map of the United Kingdom, see <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>. - Mod.LK]
