Plymouth Herald [edited]<http://www.plymouthherald.co.uk/more-than-220-hit-by-diarrhoea-bug-in-south-west-outbreak/story-29657159-detail/story.html>More than 220 people have been hit by a diarrhoea and vomiting bug in an outbreak sweeping across the south west [of England].According to Public Health England (PHE) there have so far been 223 cases of sickness and diarrhoea caused by _Cryptosporidium_ across the region since June [2016].Cases have been reported in Devon and Cornwall as well as Wiltshire, Gloucestershire, Somerset, and Dorset.Of the cases 34 were reported in Swindon, leading to the closure of a swimming pool. There have been 20 cases of the disease, usually spread by water, reported in Devon.Dr Toyin Ejidokun, from PHE South West, said: ""Cryptosporidiosis is predominantly a waterborne disease and infection can be caused by drinking contaminated water or swallowing contaminated water in swimming pools or streams. ""It can also be acquired by animal and human contact.""PHE is investigating to find the source or sources of the infection._Cryptosporidium_ is a parasite that lives in, or on, another organism. It can infect your bowels and cause cryptosporidiosis. This is a form of bowel infection called gastroenteritis, which leads to diarrhoea and vomiting. Infection can occur in humans and animals and is spread by contact with soil, water, food or surfaces that have been contaminated by infected faeces containing the parasite.Young children are most likely to become infected. Symptoms usually last for up to 2 weeks, sometimes longer. Symptoms can be very severe in people whose immune system is not working properly. No specific treatment is needed for most people but you should drink plenty of fluids to avoid lack of body fluid (dehydration). You should not use a swimming pool for 14 days after the infection has cleared.Human-to-human transmission of infection is possible -- for example, by not washing your hands after changing the nappy of an infected child and then putting your hands in your mouth. Outbreaks can occur within a household or, for example, within nurseries. Animal-to-human transmission is also possible. This is commonly through contact with infected animals in farms or zoos or through contact with infected animal dung.You may also become infected if you drink contaminated water. In fact, the largest outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis have occurred when drinking water becomes contaminated with sewage or manure. Adequate filtration of water is needed to remove the parasite. Swimming in contaminated water (for example, in lakes or rivers) can also cause infection. Outbreaks have also occurred through swimming pool contamination, as chlorination doesn't always kill the parasite.Eating contaminated food is a less common way that you may become infected with _Cryptosporidium_. For example, food that is washed in contaminated water or fruit or vegetables that are contaminated by infected manure that has been used to encourage them to grow. Unpasteurised milk may also be a source of infection.[Byline: Neil Shaw]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Infection with _Cryptosporidium_ spp. is well known in areas where drinking water is drawn from surface water sources, including the UK. Sporadic outbreaks linked to single swimming pools and recreational water parks are usually ascribed to carriers (children) defecating in these facilities. Multicenter outbreaks like the one described here most probably are due to contaminated drinking water. - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/279>.]
