Daily Trust [edited]<http://www.dailytrust.com.ng/news/health/alas-lassa-fever-sneaks-back-into-nigeria/160408.html>The respite is over. Lassa fever season is back, and it's brought Anambra and Delta [states] closer over the River Niger bridge.New cases popping up in Asaba [Delta state] have led to the death of a doctor and 2 others.The doctor was transferred from El Comfort Clinic in Asaba to Nnamdi Azikiwe University Teaching Hospital in Nnewi where he died hours later.Anambra has confirmed 3 deaths, but the number of cases suspected to be Lassa is uncertain. At least 28 people -- 18 in Anambra and 10 in Delta -- are under quarantine or surveillance on account of connection with Lassa fever.The tracing and tracking down all who have been in contact with any of the dead confirmed for Lassa is ongoing and laborious.The deaths in Anambra have prompted Enugu [state] to intensify watch on its borders. It is sending surveillance officers to communities that border Anambra, afraid to leave anything to chance, said Enugu chief surveillance officer Okechukwu Ossai. ""There is high daily mobility of residents of our state to Anambra and vice versa, and we share a near seamless border with Anambra,"" he said.Lassa fever has broken into an epidemic in Nigeria nearly every year since 1969 when it was 1st identified and named Lassa -- after the town in Borno where researchers traced it. It is endemic in the country, has been for 47 years, killing dozens every year, and all states are at risk, the Nigerian Medical Association has warned in the past.It has a fatality rate lower than Ebola virus disease, but in one year killed more Nigerians than the Ebola outbreak ever did. Concern is about relationship with the land and animals. The Lassa virus is carried in multimammate rats (the common soft-furred African rat whose female has a double row of breasts), which normally live in bushes and visit nearby homes for food, which they contaminate. Burning bush to create space for farming drives the rats from bushes into homes. ""Local and cultural habits of drying foods on the roads, streets and even around houses, carelessly also provide avenues for the spread of the virus,"" said Dr Kayode Obembe, former president of Nigerian Medical Association.80 percent of Lassa fever cases pass unnoticed with symptoms similar in many common diseases as mild fevers, body aches, tiredness and loss of appetite. But severe cases progress with sore throat, cough, vomiting, diarrhoea and unexplained bleeding from body openings. Deaths may eventually occur.According to the World Health Organisation, ""Some studies indicate that 300 000 to 500 000 cases of Lassa fever and 5000 deaths occur yearly across West Africa. In fatal cases, between one and 15 out of every 100 patients hospitalised for Lassa fever could die, usually within 14 days after the illness starts. The disease is especially severe late in pregnancy. In 8 out of 10 pregnancies in 3rd trimester, Lassa can kill a mother or cause an abortion.The 1st point of contact with Lassa fever [virus] is in consuming food contaminated by the multimammate rats. They harbour the virus, but don't fall sick from it. Instead they excrete the virus in urine, faeces and other bodily secretions, which contaminates food.Patients with Lassa also transmit the virus in body secretions -- and health workers or family caregivers handling them are at risk.The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) has response teams rolling through affected states to beef up surveillance and actively search for cases of Lassa fever.The only fortunate thing about Lassa fever is that it has a definitive treatment, unlike Ebola, said NCDC director, Dr Chikwe Ihekweazu.Treatment takes care of the disease and prevents further transmission. Ihekweazu says beyond handling food to avoid contamination and contact with rats, handling patients is vital to preventing transmission.It requires health workers to have full complement of personnel protective equipment at best or simple things as gloves at worst.[Byline: Judd-Leonard Okafor]--Communicated by:Celeste Whitlow<whitlow.celeste@gmail.com>[ProMED thanks Celeste Whitlow for sending in this report.Although there has been a reported decline in the number of Lassa fever cases recently this year (2016), the virus is endemic in rodents in Nigeria and cases can occur at any time. The case count in this report is undefined, given an uncertain number of suspected cases in Anambra state. It is not stated if the physician who died contracted his Lassa fever virus from an infected patient or from exposure to food materials contaminated by infected rodents, nor did a report from a different source (<http://punchng.com/lassa-fever-kills-doctor-three-others-anambra/>). Prevention and control of Lassa fever in nature depends on control of the rodent reservoir, which occurs across Nigeria and beyond. Reduction of populations of this rodent will require active participation at the village level. That will necessitate mounting a public education program with support of rodent control technicians. Preventing entry of rodents into the home and keeping food materials tightly covered are helpful measures to prevent infection. Appropriate use of personal protective equipment is essential to prevent virus transmission to health care workers in hospitals and clinics.Lassa virus is a member of the family _Arenaviridae_ and can cause acute hemorrhagic fever in humans.Images of _Mastomys_ mice can be seen at <http://www.ispot.org.za/node/255877>.Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/nigeria.pdf> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/62>. - Mod.TYThe ""definitive treatment"" referred to in the media report is presumably ribavirin, which has been shown to be beneficial in Lassa fever, in conjunction with supportive therapy such as fluids. Fatalities can still occur despite treatment. - Mod.LM]
