Huffington Post [edited]<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/2016/08/22/ebola-with-wings-papua-new-guineas-tuberculosis-epidemic-is/>Papua New Guinea [PNG]'s children are bearing the burden of the nation's drug resistant tuberculosis crisis, with experts warning that current statistics on the disease, dubbed ""Ebola with wings"", are an underestimate. A report, commissioned by the charity ChildFund Australia, found PNG has one of the highest TB prevalence rates in the world at 529 cases per 100 000 population. Children account for about 26 per cent of detected TB cases in PNG, but experts fear that percentage is higher. Poor nutrition, overcrowding and inadequate housing all provide ideal conditions for TB to thrive.""I was there last week, and it was really distressing to see these really committed nurses, village health workers, and the like -- not nearly enough of them; there's a critical shortage -- with often limited training and materials to use,"" said Spence [ChildFund chief executive officer Nigel Spence]. ""It's no wonder that the disease is taking hold.""Children are particularly susceptible to the most disabling forms of TB, including TB meningitis, which can result in lifelong brain damage, ChildFund said. ""Despite the problems with TB, there is generally a lack of awareness of the disease amongst community members in PNG, and a lack of realisation they may be sick with the illness,"" said Spence.The author of the ChildFund report, journalist Jo Chandler, contracted TB in 2011 and was cured after a lengthy and toxic treatment. She told the Huff Post Australia of motivated, frontline staff who, with family and friends affected, want to help battle the disease. ""They understand how urgent it is; they want to be professional, and they are just hamstrung,"" she said. ""If mum or dad has TB, and they're the ones that are growing the gardens and providing the income, then the whole family is affected by it,"" Chandler said.TB is putting a strain on PNG's already taxed health system. Chandler spoke to a doctor at PNG's largest hospital, Port Moresby General, where gene analysis machines, an important tool for diagnosing TB, are being rolled out. But there were no slides to put samples on and feed into the machine for analysis. ""(The pediatrician) is in the main hospital in the country, and his fallback is to send samples to Brisbane, but they have no budget left to send them to Brisbane,"" she said. ""So if you're saying that's the situation in Port Moresby -- the best resourced part of the country -- then you can imagine that if you're in one of the other hotspots, in Gulf (Province) or in Daru...""The supply chains, the infrastructure, the expertise, the maintenance of basic pieces of equipment, all of it needs to be rigorously reinforced, and it's going to require a big effort to do that, she said. The PNG Government has reportedly spent about USA 3.3 million on its emergency TB response. Australia has committed USD 60 million to battle TB in PNG between 2011 and 2017.At least 2 Australians have died in the past 3 years from TB contracted in either PNG or on the Torres Strait. In 2015 a PNG parliamentary inquiry looked into the country's multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis crisis and was told that it was increasing at an alarming rate.[byline: Eoin Blackwell]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promed-mail.org>[For discussions of tuberculosis in Papua New Guinea, see my moderator comments in prior ProMED-mail posts below. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/188>.]
