Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/north-carolina-reports-human-eastern-equine-encephalitis-case-33903/>North Carolina reports human eastern equine encephalitis case-------------------------------------------------------------Mosquitoborne eastern equine encephalitis has infected one human and 7 horses this summer in North Carolina, state health and agricultural officials report.Also known as EEE or 'triple E', the virus can cause inflammation of the brain. While there is a vaccine for horses, there is none for humans. State Health and Human Services' Division of Public Health officials noted there was a single case affecting a human reported in North Carolina. State Agriculture Department officials said 7 cases affecting horses were reported in Brunswick, Hoke, Onslow, Pitt, Robeson, Sampson and Wake counties. North Carolina averages one case in humans and 10 in horses every year.""Triple E is not communicable between horses and people,"" said state public health veterinarian Carl Williams, DVM. ""It is transmitted to humans by the bite of an infected mosquito. While triple E is very rare in humans, when it does occur it is a serious illness, so it is very important to take protective measures against mosquito bites.""There is no human vaccine for EEE. Symptoms typically appear 4 to 10 days after someone is bitten by an infected mosquito and may include high fever, severe headache, stiff neck, and sore throat. Severe cases can involve encephalitis, an inflammation of the brain. Those at highest risk of contracting EEE live in or visit woodland habitats, and people who work outside or participate in outdoor recreational activities. If you or someone you know is experiencing flu-like symptoms, contact your local medical provider.""Fortunately, there are preventive measures that can be taken to reduce the chance of infection in both people and horses,"" said Dr Mike Neault, director of livestock operations, North Carolina Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services [NCDA&CS]. ""Reducing breeding grounds for mosquitoes on your property is one of the most important preventative measures for humans and animals. Vaccines are available for horses and both the American Association of Equine Practitioners and the NCDA&CS recommend equine owners work with their veterinarian to ensure their animals are kept current on their vaccinations against triple E.""Take steps to reduce habitat for pests including mosquitoes and reduce exposure to them.Tip and toss:- Reduce mosquito breeding opportunities by emptying standing water from flowerpots, gutters, buckets, pool covers, pet water dishes, discarded tires and birdbaths at least weekly.- Be sure to tightly secure screens on all openings on rain barrels used for water conservation.- Clean up any trash or leaves that may be around your home or in rain gutters.Reduce exposure and use preventive measures:- Use mosquito repellent that contains DEET (or equivalent) on exposed skin and wear clothing treated with permethrin, a synthetic insecticide used against disease-carrying insects.- Mosquito-proof your home by installing or repairing screens on windows and doors to keep mosquitoes outside, and use air conditioning if you have it.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] New Jersey: equineDate: Tue 30 Aug 2016Source: New Jersey 101.5 [edited]<http://nj1015.com/deadly-mosquito-borne-horse-virus-makes-nj-appearance/>The state [New Jersey] is asking horse owners to be vigilant in vaccinating their animals against diseases spread by mosquitoes. A horse in Morris County, the 1st reported case in 2016 of eastern equine encephalitis (EEE,) was euthanized 13 Aug [2016]. It had not been vaccinated for the mosquitoborne illness.""Vaccinated animals are much less likely to contract deadly diseases such as EEE and West Nile virus,"" New Jersey secretary of agriculture Douglas H Fisher said in a press release. According to the state, EEE causes inflammation of the brain tissue and poses a higher risk of death for horses than West Nile.Dr Dante Costagliola, an equine veterinarian in Point Pleasant, said there's a ""tremendous"" amount of non-compliance in New Jersey on the vaccination front. ""After all, it is up to the owner,"" Costagliola told New Jersey 101.5. ""It's just like people: You could choose not to vaccinate at all if you don't want to."" It's recommended EEE vaccines are administered on a yearly basis, Costagliola said. The vaccine is typically packaged with protections against other illnesses, and it would typically be administered ahead of the warmer months.The owner of Legacy Ranch in Howell said the site's 45 horses are vaccinated regularly, usually at the direction of experts such as Costagliola.Infected horses are not considered a threat to humans, who can also host the virus. The biggest threat to humans is the bite of an infected mosquito. Severe cases can begin with vomiting and a high fever, eventually progressing into disorientation, seizures and coma. About 5 to 10 human cases are reported annually in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. There is no specific treatment.[byline: Dino Flammia]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[""Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is a member of the genus Alphavirus, family Togaviridae. Other medically important alphaviruses found in the Americas include western equine encephalitis virus (WEEV) and Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV). EEEV has a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome. The virus particles are spherical and have a diameter of 60-65 nm. Of the 4 lineages of EEEV, Group I is endemic in North America and the Caribbean and causes most human disease cases; the other 3 groups (IIA, IIB, and III) cause primarily equine illness in Central and South America."" <http://www.cdc.gov/EasternEquineEncephalitis/tech/virus.html>Wild birds are the reservoir hosts, and the black-tailed mosquito, _Culiseta melanura_, is the vector in swamps. Other mosquito species may act as bridge vectors, carrying the virus out of swamps into adjoining localities and transmitting the virus to humans and equine animals. The species occasionally feeds on mammals, and may have been the bridge transmitter in the case above.Clinical cases in humans are very serious, with a case fatality rate of 33 per cent and significant neurological sequelae in survivors (see <http://www.cdc.gov/EasternEquineEncephalitis/>). It is prudent to follow the recommendations above to reduce mosquito bites. Reducing mosquito breeding sites is also helpful; however, control of the black-tailed mosquito in swampy areas is more difficult.""Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is transmitted to humans through the bite of an infected mosquito. Human EEEV cases occur relatively infrequently, largely because the primary transmission cycle takes place in and around swampy areas where human populations tend to be limited. All residents of and visitors to areas where EEEV activity has been identified are at risk of infection. People who engage in outdoor work and recreational activities in endemic areas are at increased risk of infection. Persons over age 50 and under age 15 seem to be at greatest risk for developing severe disease when infected with EEEV. Overall, only about 4-5 per cent of human EEEV infections result in EEE. EEEV infection is thought to confer life-long immunity against re-infection. It does not confer significant cross-immunity against other alphaviruses (for example, western equine encephalitis virus), and it confers no cross-immunity against flaviviruses (for example, West Nile virus) or bunyaviruses (for example, La Crosse virus)."" <http://www.cdc.gov/easternequineencephalitis/tech/epi.html>Regarding equines:Vaccination is very effective in preventing the viral infection. The vaccine is usually a combination of EEE, WNV, WEE and sometimes VEE and tetanus. Mosquito control is very important in reducing the mosquitos, which is another form of helping to protect your horse.Protection from EEE can wane in approximately 4 months. Areas with high prevalence would be wise to vaccine every 4 months.Vaccination schedules for EEE/WEE---------------------------------""Adult horses previously vaccinated against EEE/WEE: annual revaccination must be completed prior to vector season in the spring. In animals at high risk or with limited immunity, more frequent vaccination or appropriately timed vaccination is recommended in order to induce protective immunity during periods of likely exposure. In areas where mosquitoes are active year-round, many veterinarians elect to vaccinate horses at 6 month intervals to ensure uniform protection throughout the year, although this practice is not specifically recommended by manufacturers of vaccines.""Adult horses, previously unvaccinated against EEE/WEE or of unknown vaccination history: administer a primary series of 2 doses with a 3 or 4 to 6 week interval between doses. Revaccinate prior to the onset of the next vector season and annually thereafter.""Pregnant mares, previously vaccinated against EEE/WEE: vaccinate 4 to 6 weeks before foaling.""Pregnant mares, unvaccinated or having unknown vaccinal history: immediately begin a 2-dose primary series with a 3 or 4 week interval between doses. Booster at 4 to 6 weeks before foaling or prior to the onset of the next vector season -- whichever occurs 1st.""Foals of mares vaccinated against EEE/WEE in the pre-partum period: administer a primary 3-dose series beginning at 4 to 6 months of age. A 3 or 4 to 6 week interval between the 1st and 2nd doses is recommended. The 3rd dose should be administered at 10 to 12 months of age, prior to the onset of the next mosquito season.""In the south eastern US, due to earlier seasonal disease risk, vaccination may be started at 2 to 3 months of age. When initiating vaccinations in younger foals, a series of 4 primary doses should be administered, with a 3 or 4 week interval between the 1st and 2nd doses and a 4 week interval between the 2nd and 3rd doses. The 4th dose should be administered at 10 to 12 months of age, prior to the onset of the next mosquito season.""Foals of unvaccinated mares or having unknown vaccinal history: administer a primary series of 3 doses with a 30 day interval between the 1st and 2nd doses and a 60 day [8 week] interval between the 2nd and 3rd doses. The primary series of vaccinations should be initiated at 3 to 4 months of age and, where possible, be completed prior to the onset of the high-risk insect vector season. If the primary series is initiated during the mosquito vector season, an interval of 3 to 4 weeks between the 2nd and 3rd doses is preferable to the interval of 8 weeks described above.""Horses having been naturally infected and recovered: recovered horses likely develop lifelong immunity. Consider revaccination only if the immune status of the animal changes the risk for susceptibility to infection. Examples of these conditions would include the long-term use of corticosteroids and pituitary adenoma.""Portions of this comment has been extracted from <http://www.aaep.org/-i-165.html?osCsid=a18pv8jvdmk6hq4>. Other portions of this comment were borrowed from Mods.TY/TG. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/235>, <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/232>.]
