The News [edited]<https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/146242-Death-toll-hits-six-as-another-Congo-fever-patient-dies>Congo fever claimed another life in the city when a 49 year old man from Afghanistan succumbed to the deadly viral disease at the Aga Khan University Hospital (AKUH) on Sunday, health officials and family of the deceased said on Monday. The man had been brought from Kabul by road and admitted to the private hospital on 21 Aug [2016], his nephew told The News. His family members said he was not an animal trader, but he used to purchase cattle for personal consumption and would slaughter them himself, and that could have been the reason why he caught deadly fever.Zafar Mehdi, an official of the Sindh health department, confirmed the death of a person due to Congo fever at the AKUH, but he said they were still collecting more information about the patient and how he contracted the disease.The fatality occurred amid deaths of dozens of sacrificial animals in mysterious circumstances at the cattle market set up along Super Highway, feeding an environment of fear that has gripped sellers. Concerns depended about the possibility of an epidemic of the tickborne viral infection on Mon [29 Aug 2016], which saw a fall in the number of potential buyers at the market where traders said around 120 animals had died in mysterious circumstances over the past few days.However, Naveed Baig, an organiser of the cattle market, claimed that no deaths of animals occurred due to Congo virus or any other disease at the market, saying the last person who died due to the fever was doing business in the cattle market of Malir, not along the Super Highway.With the Afghan national's death, the number of fatalities from Congo Crimean Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) in the city reached 6.On 19 Aug [2016] a 22 year old animal trader from Bahawalpur had died of the disease at the Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre. On 11 Aug [2016], a 65 year old man died of CCHF at a private hospital. The Sindh government's focal person confirmed the death of the 65y old, who hailed from Afghanistan and had been under treatment at the hospital. On 30 Jul [2016], a senior registrar of Bahawal Victoria Hospital died in Karachi after he treated a patient in Bahawalpur without taking any precautionary measures.According to experts, Congo fever is caused by a virus that is found in a tick, which lives on cattle, and when a person comes into contact with an infected animal or the tick, he or she is infected. CCHF is an extremely lethal with an over 50 per cent mortality rate and hardly any patient survives due to serious complications it caused, the experts said, adding that the disease was highly contagious and, in most cases, doctors and paramedics treating the patient also contracted the virus and died.Despite the hue and cry raised by media and organisations of doctors, including the Pakistan Islamic Medical Association (PIMA), no arrangements have been made by the provincial livestock department for carrying out inspections of cattle heads being brought to the market.The staff deployed at the market only count cattle heads and receive the money before allowing them to enter the facility, creating a pool of infected animals on the boundary of Karachi, experts said. ""Every year, dozens of patients are infected by the Congo virus before Eidul Azha, as infected animals from Afghanistan and border areas of Balochistan are brought to Karachi without any inspection and those coming into their contact get the infection. There is an urgent need to inspect the cattle being brought to Karachi and spray them with insecticides and germicides to protect citizens,"" said Dr Atif Hafeez, PIMA Karachi president, said.[byline: M. Waqar Bhatti]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[These cases were reported in the prior Promed post: Crimean-Congo hem. fever - Pakistan (12): Sindh (Karachi) fatal, RFI 20160831.4452554 dated 31 Aug 2016. The recent spate of cases, particularly fatal ones among health care workers from Punjab, has highlighted the need to improve awareness among the health professionals to train and practice standard and contact precautions when suspected CCHF cases present to health care facilities. The hospital authorities must be persuaded to ensure availability of requisite disinfectants, personal protective equipment, and opportunities for staff education on this disease endemic in Pakistan and neighboring countries. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/137>.]
