KPPC [edited]<http://www.scpr.org/news/2016/08/30/64121/another-mosquito-borne-virus-reemerges-in-orange-c/>A mosquitoborne virus similar to West Nile virus that hadn't been seen in Orange County [Southern California] for 30 years has been discovered in mosquito samples gathered in Garden Grove, but a spokesman for the Orange County Mosquito and Vector Control District said residents need not be too concerned.The St Louis encephalitis virus, or SLE, turned up on 9 Aug [2016] during the routine mosquito sampling the district conducts throughout the year. It was the 1st time it had been detected since 1986, said district spokesman Jared Dever. The last recorded human infection of SLE in Orange County was in 1984.SLE is transmitted to humans by the bite of an infected mosquito. About 80 per cent of people infected will show no symptoms. If symptoms do appear, they are similar to those of the West Nile virus: fever, headache, nausea and fatigue.""As far as the level of concern for St Louis encephalitis infection in humans, it's still quite low,"" Dever said. ""This is a single indication from a mosquito sample that was taken. However, that does not translate into a direct risk of human infection because the level of virus that we're detecting throughout the county is at such a low level.""West Nile virus, which is our most prominent and most prevalent vectorborne disease, is of much greater concern due to the level of infection we are finding in mosquitoes we are sampling for West Nile virus,"" Dever said. ""Right now ... about 33 per cent of all mosquitoes that we're collecting in Orange County are testing positive for West Nile virus.""Mosquitoes pick up the SLE and West Nile viruses from birds.SLE's disappearance was thought to result from the rise of West Nile virus, which prompts an immune response and development of antibodies that also blocked SLE infection. With the rise of West Nile virus around the year 2000, detection of SLE dropped considerably, Dever said. However, SLE [virus] has been found recently in mosquito samples in Los Angeles, Riverside, San Bernardino and Kern counties.""We're not really sure why St Louis encephalitis is reemerging in Southland counties, but also in Arizona as well,"" Dever said. ""They are in the same group or the same family of viruses, and they are very similar to one another. And it was assumed for many years that this provided some protection against infection in birds from one or the other. So when West Nile virus came into Orange County in 2003, we really saw a dramatic subsidence of indications of St Louis encephalitis at that time throughout California.""Dever said the preventative measures that people can take to avoid being infected with SLE are the same as for West Nile virus and the Zika virus:- eliminate standing water around your residence;- make sure all window and door screens on your residence are in good repair;- wear a repellent containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or IR 3535.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall[It is difficult to explain conclusively why SLE virus declined in Southern California counties. Cross-protection with WNV antibodies mentioned above is one possibility; however, WNV and SLE virus do co-circulate in other localities. Alternatively, perhaps SLE virus has been circulating at levels too low to detect or is periodically reintroduced from other localities, perhaps by birds. It is interesting that SLE virus has reemerged in several localities in California and across the south western USA in the past 2 years. A recent human case this year (2016) in the adjoining state of Nevada is the 1st one in 9 years there, and the virus was also found in many pools of mosquitoes collected in the area. Last year (2015), human cases occurred in the adjoining state of Arizona.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of California and Nevada in the western USA can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/370>. - Mod.TY]
