Wet Mountain Tribune [edited]<http://www.wetmountaintribune.com/home.asp?i=956&p=6>Local public health office issues tularemia warning---------------------------------------------------A person who resides in south east Custer County [Colorado] tested positive for tularemia the week of 22 Aug [2016] and that has prompted the Custer County Public Health Agency to alert county residents to take certain precautions. The individual is thought to have acquired the illness from her pet puppy. Residents are advised that tularemia-causing bacteria may be present in some of the mammals -- especially rabbits, rodents and hares -- in the area.Public Health would ask that if anyone notices a die-off of rodents to please notify the public health office. Tularemia is a bacterial infection most commonly transmitted to humans by the handling of sick or dead animals infected with tularemia. Infection can also arise from the bite of infected insects (most commonly ticks and deer flies), by eating or drinking contaminated food or water, and by the inhalation of airborne bacteria.Typical signs of infection in humans are fever, chills, headache, muscle aches, chest pain, and coughing. If tularemia is caused by the bite of an infected insect or from bacteria entering a cut or scratch, it usually causes a skin ulcer and swollen glands. Eating or drinking food or water containing the bacteria may produce a throat infection, stomach pain, diarrhea and vomiting. Tularemia can be effectively treated with antimicrobials, therefore should you have any of these early signs, seek medical attention as soon as possible.Dogs and cats also get tularemia by eating infected rabbits or other rodents and through tick and deer fly bites. If your pet shows symptoms of illness including fever, nasal and eye discharge, and skin sores, take it to the veterinarian promptly. As in humans, tularemia is easily treated if diagnosed early in dogs and cats.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[In 2015, 52 cases of human tularemia were reported in Colorado, more than 10 times the typical number of 0-4 cases reported annually from 1954-2013. The clinical manifestations of human tularemia depend on the route of entry of the organism into the body. Airborne _Francisella tularensis_ would mainly cause pleuropneumonitis. Exposures that penetrate broken skin result in ulceroglandular or glandular disease (""gland"" in this case referring to lymph nodes). The onset of tularemia is usually abrupt, with fever, headache, chills and rigors, generalized body aches (often prominent in the low back), coryza (inflammation of the mucous membranes lining the nasal cavity), and sore throat. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur. Sweats, fever, chills, progressive weakness, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss characterize the continuing illness. Some illnesses manifest as an undifferentiated febrile illness which is called the typhoidal form. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/8692>.]
