Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases ahead of print. doi:10.1089/vbz.2016.2058 [edited]<http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/vbz.2016.2058>Huang Yan-Jang S., Ayers Victoria B., Lyons Amy C., Unlu Isik, Alto Barry W., Cohnstaedt Lee W., Higgs Stephen, and Vanlandingham Dana L.. _Culex_ Species Mosquitoes and Zika Virus.AbstractRecent reports of Zika virus (ZIKV) isolates from _Culex_ species mosquitoes have resulted in concern regarding a lack of knowledge on the number of competent vector species for ZIKV transmission in the new world. Although observations in the field have demonstrated that ZIKV isolation can be made from _Culex_ species mosquitoes, the detection of ZIKV in these mosquitoes is not proof of their involvement in a ZIKV transmission cycle. Detection may be due to recent feeding on a viremic vertebrate, and is not indicative of replication in the mosquito. In this study, susceptibility of recently colonized _Culex_ species mosquitoes was investigated. The results showed a high degree of refractoriness among members of _Culex pipiens_ complex to ZIKV even when exposed to high-titer blood meals. Our finding suggests that the likelihood of _Culex_ species mosquitoes serving as secondary vectors for ZIKV is very low, therefore vector control strategies for ZIKV should remain focused on _Aedes_ species mosquitoes. Our demonstration that _Culex quinquefasciatus_ from Vero Beach, FL, is refractory to infection with ZIKV is especially important and timely. Based on our data, we would conclude that the autochthonous cases of Zika in Florida are not due to transmission by _C. quinquefasciatus_, and so control efforts should focus on other species, logically _Aedes aegypti_ and _Aedes albopictus_.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides additional evidence that _Culex pipiens_ and _Culex quinquefasciatus_ are very unlikely to serve as Zika virus vectors. It is challenging enough to attempt to control _Aedes aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ without having to deal with the more widely distributed _Culex pipiens_ and _Culex quinquefasciatus_. Interestingly, a group of Brazilian researchers at the Rio de Janeiro's Fiocruz institute gathered several hundred mosquitoes in 4 areas of Rio and fed them Zika-infected blood. Only 2 developed an early infection 14 days later, and the virus was not detected in their heads or in their saliva. They concluded that the _Culex quinquefasciatus_ mosquito has not played a role in the Zika epidemic that has hit Brazil over the last year [2015] <http://bigstory.ap.org/article/6ae2c6d651a44a16a572d399eb366f16/brazil-scientists-culex-mosquito-not-transmitting-zika>. - Mod. TY]******[3] Neuropathies, BrazilDate: November 2016 (ahead of print)Source: Emerg Infect Dis. 20 (11) Nov 2016.doi.org/10.3201/eid2211.160901 [edited]<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/22/11/16-0901_article>Barcellos C, Xavier DR, Pavao A, Boccolini C, Pina F, Pedroso M, et al. Increased hospitalizations for neuropathies in Brazil as indicators of Zika virus infection, according to health information system data, Brazil.AbstractEvidence is increasing that Zika virus can cause extensive damage to the central nervous system, affecting both fetuses and adults. We sought to identify traces of possible clinical manifestations of nervous system diseases among the registers of hospital admissions recorded in the Brazilian Unified Health System. Time series of several diagnoses from the International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision, were analyzed by using control diagrams, during January 2008-February 2016. Beginning in mid-2014, we observed an unprecedented and significant rise in the hospitalization rate for congenital malformations of the nervous system, Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome, encephalitis, myelitis, and encephalomyelitis. These conditions are compatible with viral infection and inflammation-associated manifestations and may have been due to the entrance of Zika virus into Brazil. These findings show the necessity of adequately diagnosing and treating suspected cases of Zika virus infection and also that health surveillance systems can be improved by using routine data.DiscussionOur results show that the rates of hospitalization in the Northeast region for some neuropathies were subject to abrupt changes beginning in mid-2014, when it is believed that Zika virus was introduced to the country (and later produced outbreaks in 2015). Conversely, the onset of hospitalizations for congenital malformations of the nervous system observed in November 2015 may be a result of the 1st public health warnings about Zika-related microcephaly, issued in the same month. Taking into consideration the fact that CNS malformations originate, typically, in the first 3 months of gestation, infection may have occurred in mid-2015, which coincides with the observed peaks of GBS and CNS inflammatory diseases. The hospitalization rates have slightly increased nationally during the 1st months of 2016, probably in reaction to warnings about microcephaly and the ensuing necessity to keep neonates hospitalized to investigate potential cases.The concentration of neuropathies in the Northeast states remains a mystery for researchers and health surveillance services. First, we can assume that the virus entered Brazil mainly in this region and that, with the spread of the epidemic to other regions, the number of cases of neuropathies will increase in the rest of the country. On the other hand, the theory persists that other risk factors, such as chronic diseases and co-infections with Zika virus. The region had one of the worst droughts in its history, during 2010-2013, resulting in contamination of drinking water, food insecurity and outbreaks of diarrhea across the region, which could have affected the immunity status of the population. In addition, concomitant outbreaks of Zika virus infection and dengue, as was observed in French Polynesia and in northeast region of Brazil, could potentiate the neurologic effects of infection with Zika virus. Chikungunya virus was also circulating in the region during 2014 and 2015, although in more restricted areas and with less magnitude, and it can also produce severe neurologic complications such as GBS.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides a retrospective overview of some of the neurological effects associated with Zika virus infection, reinforcing results of previous reports. - Mod. TY]******[4] Virus in tears, miceDate: Thu 25 Aug 2016Source: Cell reports in press. doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.079 [edited]<http://www.cell.com/cell-reports/abstract/S2211-1247(16)31175-5>Jonathan J. Miner, Abdoulaye Sene, Justin M. Richner, Amber M. Smith, Andrea Santeford, Norimitsu Ban, James Weger-Lucarelli, Francesca Manzella, Claudia Ruckert, Jennifer Govero, Kevin K. Noguchi, Gregory D. Ebel, Michael S. Diamond. Zika Virus Infection in Mice Causes Panuveitis with Shedding of Virus in Tears.SummaryZika virus (ZIKV) is an emerging flavivirus that causes congenital abnormalities and Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome. ZIKV infection also results in severe eye disease characterized by optic neuritis, chorioretinal atrophy, and blindness in newborns and conjunctivitis and uveitis in adults. We evaluated ZIKV infection of the eye by using recently developed mouse models of pathogenesis. ZIKV-inoculated mice developed conjunctivitis, panuveitis, and infection of the cornea, iris, optic nerve, and ganglion and bipolar cells in the retina. This phenotype was independent of the entry receptors Axl or Mertk, given that Axl-/-, Mertk-/-, and Axl-/-Mertk-/- double knockout mice sustained levels of infection similar to those of control animals. We also detected abundant viral RNA in tears, suggesting that virus might be secreted from lacrimal glands or shed from the cornea. This model provides a foundation for studying ZIKV-induced ocular disease, defining mechanisms of viral persistence, and developing therapeutic approaches for viral infections of the eye.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[It will be interesting to see how closely this mouse model reflects human disease resulting from Zika virus infection, including evidence of virus shed in tears. Certainly, conjunctivitis is a common symptom in human ZIKV infections. If ZIKV is shed in human tears, is it a potential source of virus that could be transmitted to other people. - Mod.TY]******[5] WHO Guidance regarding sexual transmissionDate: Tue 6 Sep 2016Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness response Interim guidance on prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/zika/sexual-transmission-prevention/en/>1. Introduction--------------1.1 BackgroundBased on this new evidence, the recommended length of time for safer sex practices for asymptomatic males returning from areas with active Zika virus transmission was extended from 8 weeks to 6 months. This is the same length of time as is recommended for symptomatic males. This recommendation now also applies to females, whether or not they have had symptoms. The 6 month duration of safer sexual practice upon return has not changed.1.2 Target audienceThis document is intended to inform the general public, and to be used by health care workers and policy makers to provide guidance on appropriate sexual practices in the context of Zika virus.2. Sexual transmission of Zika virus------------------------------------2.1 Current evidence2.1.1. Summary of publicationsAs of 26 August 2016, a total of 17 studies or reports have been published on sexual transmission of Zika virus [see the full report at the above URL for details]2.1.2. Modes of sexual transmissionZika virus transmission by sexual intercourse was first suggested by Foy et al. Published in 2011, this study described the case of a male patient infected with Zika virus in south-eastern Senegal in 2008 who infected his wife via sexual intercourse upon return to the United States of America. Since then, and up to 26 Aug 2016, sexual transmission of Zika virus has been reported in 11 countries (United States of America, Italy, France, Germany, New Zealand, Argentina, Chile, Peru, Portugal, Canada, and Spain) and referred mainly to vaginal intercourse. On 2 Feb 2016, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announced the 1st documented case of a man infected with Zika virus through anal sex. Soon after, a case report published in April 2016 raised the suspicion of Zika virus transmission through oral sex. The case had sexual contact with a partner with symptoms of Zika virus infection. Transmission via oral sex was suspected as the sexual activity involved vaginal intercourse, with no condom and no ejaculation, and oral sex with ejaculation. Up to June 2016, cases of sexual transmission were reported only from symptomatic males. At that date, for the 1st time, a possible man to woman sexual transmission between two asymptomatic cases was documented in Brittany, France. In August 2016 a 2nd case of sexually transmitted Zika virus from an asymptomatic man, returning from a Zika virus active area, to his non traveller female partner was published. In July 2016 the 1st case of a female to male sexual transmission of Zika virus was reported. The woman had returned to New York City, USA, from an area of Zika virus activity and engaged in a condomless vaginal intercourse with her non traveller partner. The longest duration between the onset of symptoms in the index case and sexual transmission of Zika virus is 41 days.2.1.3 Presence of the virus in semenZika virus was first isolated in semen in a man in Tahiti who sought treatment for hematospermia during a Zika virus outbreak in French Polynesia in December 2013. The virus was cultured in semen at least 14 days after symptom onset. In 2016, 7 studies reported the presence of Zika virus in semen, detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). One of the reports documented that the virus was cultured from the semen specimen 14 days after diagnosis (thus more than 2 weeks after illness onset), and the viral load detected was 100 000 times that of his blood. In the 2nd report, researchers reported the case of a 68 year-old man returning to the United Kingdom from the Cook Islands. His semen was positive for Zika virus 62 days after his symptoms began. After this report, equal viral permanence was detected in a case in the Netherlands and longer shedding of the Zika virus in semen was documented in New Zealand (76 days), France (80, 93 days) and Italy (181 days) through RT-PCR. Infectious virus, however, has been recovered in semen up to 24 days. Up to date, the maximum documented time of Zika virus ribonucleic acid (RNA) detection in semen after the onset of symptoms is 188 days. The case, an Italian man, was diagnosed in Haiti where he developed Zika virus infection symptoms 14 days before returning to Italy in February 2016.3. Presence of Zika virus in other body fluids----------------------------------------------Publications on the presence of Zika virus in other body fluids that may be involved in sexual transmission have also been considered. The presence of Zika virus in the genital tract of a female with Zika virus infection was first reported in July 2016, suggesting potential risk of female to male transmission. The patient's vaginal fluids and cervical mucous were found to be positive for Zika virus RNA through RT-PCR on days 3 and 11 respectively. Studies have also reported the presence of Zika virus by RT-PCR in saliva and urine. The persistent shedding of Zika virus RNA in saliva and urine has been found up 91 days after the onset of infection. Culture of Zika virus in urine and saliva has also been reported, with the virus cultured at day 6 after symptom onset for both fluids.4. Interim recommendations--------------------------Based on growing evidence that Zika virus can be sexually transmitted, WHO recommends the following:1. In regions with active Zika virus transmission, health programmes should ensure thata. All people (male and female) with Zika virus infection and their sexual partners (particularly pregnant women) receive information about the risks of sexual transmission of Zika virus.b. Men and women also get counseling on safer sexual practices, and be offered condoms. The consistent use of condoms is essential to prevent sexually transmitted infections, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and unwanted pregnancy.c. Sexually active men and women be correctly counseled and offered a full range of contraceptive methods to be able to make an informed choice about whether and when to become pregnant, in order to prevent possible adverse pregnancy and fetal outcomes.d. Women who have had unprotected sex and do not wish to become pregnant due to concerns about Zika virus infection have ready access to emergency contraceptive services and counseling.e. Pregnant women should practice safer sex or abstain from sexual activity for at least the whole duration of the pregnancy. Their partners should also be informed about this recommendation.2. In regions with NO active Zika virus transmission health programmes should ensure that:a. Men and women returning from areas where transmission of Zika virus is known to occur should adopt safer sex practices or consider abstinence for at least 6 months upon return to prevent Zika virus infection through sexual transmission.b. Couples or women planning a pregnancy, who are returning from areas where transmission of Zika virus is known to occur, are advised to wait at least 6 months before trying to conceive to ensure that possible Zika virus infection has cleared.c. Sexual partners of pregnant women, returning from areas where transmission of Zika virus is known to occur, should be advised to practice safer sex or abstain from sexual activity for at least the whole duration of the pregnancy.Note: WHO does not recommend routine semen testing to detect Zika virus. However, symptomatic or asymptomatic men could be offered semen testing after returning from areas where transmission of Zika virus is known to occur, according to country policy. 2 tests performed at different days (e.g. 1 week interval) should be performed because of false negative results or intermittent shedding. However, more evidence is necessary to determine the exact interval between 2 tests.3. Independently of considerations regarding Zika virus, WHO always recommends the use of safer sexual practices including correct and consistent use of condoms to prevent HIV, other sexually transmitted infections and unwanted pregnancies.5. Guidance development-----------------------5.1 Acknowledgements [The sources of the information used and the organizations and staff members involved in these recommendations are listed]5.2 Guidance development methodsThis document was developed based on a review of relevant literature and guideline development group discussion and consensus. Relevant literature was sourced from MEDLINE using the following search terms: flavivirus; sexual transmission; transmission; and Zika. The guideline development group reached consensus on the recommendations through group discussion.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>
