KCRA, CNN report [edited]<http://www.kcra.com/health/hepatitis-a-outbreak-sickens-89-people-in-7-states/41578616>Hepatitis A outbreak sickens 89 people in 7 states--------------------------------------------------A continuing outbreak of foodborne hepatitis A linked to frozen strawberries has sickened 89 people in 7 states, the CDC said Thursday, 8 Sep 2016. No deaths have been reported, though 39 patients have been hospitalized. Health officials confirmed 70 people are ill in Virginia, where the outbreak 1st appeared, along with additional infections in Maryland (10), New York (1), North Carolina (1), Oregon (1), West Virginia (5) and Wisconsin (1). Hepatitis A is a viral liver infection that is highly contagious but does not result in chronic infection. Symptoms include yellow eyes or skin, abdominal pain, or pale stools. Exposure to the virus can occur by consuming tainted food or through direct contact with another person who has the infection. Nearly all of the ill people reported drinking smoothies containing strawberries at Tropical Smoothie Cafes in Maryland, North Carolina, Virginia and West Virginia prior to 8 Aug 2016. Some of the victims traveled to these locations on vacation. The strawberries were imported from Egypt. Generally, hepatitis A infections have an incubation period of 15 to 50 days before symptoms appear. Because of this long lag time, new cases have developed many days after 8 Aug 2016, when all contaminated food products were removed from the restaurants and more cases are to be expected. Anyone who consumed a smoothie after 8 Aug 2016 is not thought to be at risk for hepatitis A and available data does not indicate a continued risk at these restaurants, the CDC stated. Tropical Smoothie Cafe reported switching to another supplier for all restaurants nationwide. Along with several states and the Food and Drug Administration, the CDC continues to investigate cases of hepatitis A related to this outbreak. A hepatitis A vaccine became available in 1995, resulting in a 95 percent decline in infections, according to the CDC. Taken shortly after exposure, the vaccine or medicine can be helpful to anyone fearing they've come in contact with the virus.[Byline: Susan Scutti]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The outbreak ought to slow down once the incubation period (which averages 28 days but can be as long 45-50 days) is over, although secondary household cases may occur. As a reminder, hepatitis A vaccine is part of universal childhood immunization so it is likely that most of the cases were in adults. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
