The Daily Star [edited]<http://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/risk-low-sacrificial-animals-1282498>Anthrax infection: Risk low in sacrificial animals--------------------------------------------------When the only cow of DP became sick in early August [2016], he was worried and sought suggestions from his neighbours. The reason for his worries was well-founded, as 5 cows in his village got sick and died in the previous 2 months. The neighbours suggested slaughtering the cow and selling the meat. DP slaughtered the cow at Char Koizuri village in Sirajganj's Shahzadpur upazila [Rajshahi Division] on 8 Aug [2016] and sold the meat.At least 25 villagers, who [helped butcher] the animal and consumed its meat, had been infected with anthrax a few days later, said Abdur Rahman, health assistant of Char Koizuri Union Health and Family Welfare Centre. ""Eight of the patients are yet to recover as they have deep scars in their back, head and legs. They are kept under observation,"" he told The Daily Star.Contacted, DP said he had no idea about anthrax, and had not had his cow vaccinated.MI, another villager, alleged that 5 cattle in the village died due to the livestock department's failure to treat them. He said he had incurred a huge loss with the death of his bull worth around Tk 1.1 lakh [Tk 110 000, about USD 1400].A total of 379 people have been infected with anthrax in Sirajganj [Rajshahi Division], Meherpur [Khulna Division], Tangail [Dhaka Division] and Kushtia [Khulna Division] as of 30 Aug this year [2016], said Professor Meerjady Sabrina Flora, director of the Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR). The highest number of infection was reported in Sirajganj, one of the biggest cattle producing districts in the country. Some 182 people were infected with anthrax there.Cattle can get infected while grazing and die within 24-48 hours, epidemiologists said. Those who come in contact with diseased animal and consume the meat can get infected.However, infection in human can be treated with antibiotics -- ciprofloxacin, doxycycline and phenoxymethyl penicillin, according to IEDCR. Anthrax is an infectious disease caused by bacteria. The bacteria rest in the soil and can survive for 60 to 100 years in that state. They cannot be destroyed. Therefore, mass vaccination of cattle, stopping slaughter of the infected ones and thorough health check-up of cattle are a must to prevent anthrax infection, experts say.However, there are lapses in taking preventive measures.""As there will be more mobility of cattle [ahead of Eid], the risks [of anthrax transmission] are higher,"" said Mushtuq Husain, former principal scientific officer of IEDCR. The risks are greater in rural areas as farmers and traders can sense the disease in their cattle and slaughter them before they die, he said.Risks lower in Dhaka--------------------The risk is lower in the capital, as an animal dies within 24 to 48 hours after being infected. [Thus] a cow may die on the way or just after landing in a marketplace in the city, said Mushtuq. He, however, said unscrupulous traders could manage to slaughter diseased animals if there is a lax monitoring.SK Shaheenur Islam, livestock officer at the Department of Livestock Services in Dhaka, echoed the view. He, however, said the livestock department in Dhaka has formed 22 teams to monitor cattle markets. [And by implication should be on the spot at all times. - Mod.MHJ]Risks higher in affected districts----------------------------------Sirajganj District Livestock Officer (DLO) Aktaruzzaman Bhuiyan said livestock officials and medical teams were working in the field level to prevent trading of diseased animals.The correspondents [of this article], however, did not see any livestock official while visiting 3 cattle markets in Shahzadpur, Talgasi and Ullapara last week. Eyakub Ali, a lessee of Ullapara cattle market, said that although livestock officials are supposed to visit the busy Eid cattle market, they were yet to start monitoring. Asked, DLO Aktaruzzaman said the teams would be active a week before Eid when the sale of cattle in the markets gains momentum. He admitted that it was not possible for them to check every animal due to a shortage of staff.Mushtuq Hussain said livestock officials must conduct health checkups of cattle but a section of officials allegedly certify cattle for bribes.Vaccination not enough----------------------Mushtuq said mass vaccination of cattle in the affected districts should be the top priority to eliminate the disease in 10 years.Aktaruzzaman [the Sirajganj District Livestock Officer] claimed that around 7000 out of 9750 cows in Sirajganj were vaccinated. He, however, said 15-20 percent of cows have not been vaccinated. He said the livestock department vaccinates cattle for free. Many farmers, however, alleged that they paid Tk 40-60 [about USD 0.50-0.75] for vaccination of a cow.Shaheenur Islam [the livestock officer at the Department of Livestock Services in Dhaka] said the annual production of vaccines in the country is 50 000 doses, which is not adequate for mass vaccination of cattle in the affected districts.[Byline: Ahmed Humayun Kabir Topu and Porimol Palma]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This is an admirable account of the anthrax problems on the ground in Bangladesh. And remember Eid is upon them and the need to buy and sacrifice animals for one's family, friends, and the poor. The need for universal livestock vaccination is appreciated, especially in areas suffering livestock anthrax cases, but the vaccine production and distribution is inadequate. And while the vaccination should be free, some farmers are being charged, which does not help. And unexpected acute deaths are not being investigated, not even when there is an accumulation of them in a village. The Bangladeshi authorities are aware of all this and trying to crank up their organisation. In the meanwhile the rest of us should take note and look carefully in our own backyards for similar problems and take appropriate action.Maps of Bangladesh can be seen at <http://tinyurl.com/bw2fuve> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/13276>. - Mod.MHJ]
