Gloucestershire Live [edited]<http://www.gloucestershirelive.co.uk/it-s-a-real-threat-8203-whooping-cough-warning-to-pregnant-women-after-spike-in-cases/story-29693958-detail/story.html>Cases of highly infectious whooping cough [pertussis] have increased by 25 percent across the south region, posing a serious risk to babies and young infants. Yet despite the rise, thousands of women are still not being vaccinated, with 40 percent of pregnant women not taking the protection it offers to their newborn child. A regional campaign has been launched to raise awareness of the risks and promote uptake of the vaccine among pregnant women.Whooping cough å - known medically as pertussis -- is an infection which can create serious breathing difficulties, particularly in babies and young children. It can lead to major health complications such as brain damage and pneumonia and can be fatal. In the south region, there were 1141 cases of whooping cough in 2014, increasing by over 25 percent to 1432 in 2015. In 2012, 14 babies died in England and Wales following a whooping cough infection. Newborn and young babies are particularly vulnerable, but a highly effective vaccine is routinely available to pregnant women, who then pass the immunity to their unborn child, protecting the baby from birth until they are old enough to receive their childhood immunizations starting at around 2 months old [2 months in the USA - Mod.LL]. The vaccine is given at a GP practice or in maternity units at the point of the fetal abnormality scan, from 20 weeks of pregnancy. Ideally, it should be given before 32 weeks, but it can still be given right up to the point of labor, but with reduced effectiveness.The national average coverage of eligible pregnant women is around 60%. But in the south, there is significant variation, as low as just 43% in Slough CCG area, highlighting  areas where many women are not receiving the protection offered by the vaccine. During the winter influenza season, pregnant women should also receive the flu vaccination, which can be given at the same time as whooping cough.Dr Nigel Acheson, Regional Medical Director, said: ""People often think of whooping cough as an illness from days gone by, but it is a real threat to babies and young children right now and can lead to pneumonia, brain damage and even death. The number of infections increased by 25 percent across the south region in 2015, but despite the risk, on average just 60% of women receive the vaccination, meaning many are putting their baby at risk. As we are also approaching the winter influenza season, I also urge pregnant women to receive their free influenza vaccination, which they can have at the same time as whooping cough. This way, they will protect themselves and their baby from both potentially fatal illnesses.""[Byline: Phil Norris]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Neonatal pertussis is observed to be especially severe, with as much as a 3 percent risk of death. Symptoms can be substantially different with periods of apnea [breathing arrest] sometimes with hypoxia-induced [low oxygen] seizures, usually the most common manifestation of infection. The cough is present but so weak that it may be unrecognized. In these children with so-called malignant pertussis, leukocytosis, particularly with white blood cell (WBC) counts of 30 000 to 100 000 and severe pulmonary hypertension are ominous signs for mortality. In a study comparing neonatal pertussis to other neonatal respiratory infections, pertussis-positive neonates had longer hospital stays, less fever, more apnea and cyanosis spells, and required more days of supplemental oxygen in the hospital and represented all the infants discharged on respiratory supportive care.A 2014 publication confirms the safety of maternal pertussis immunization: Kharbanda EO, Vazquez-Benitez G, Lipkind HS, et al: Evaluation of the association of maternal pertussis vaccination with obstetric events and birth outcomes. JAMA. 2014; 312(18): 1897-904 (<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1930817>). - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>.]
