Boston Herald [edited]<http://www.bostonherald.com/news/local_coverage/2016/09/state_sees_spike_in_hepatitis_c>The number of hepatitis C cases statewide [in Massachusetts] has spiked nearly 80 percent in just 2 years, state data shows, and experts are raising the alarm about a crisis they say is fueled by the explosion of the state's heroin epidemic. State public health officials counted 311 cases of acute hepatitis C in Massachusetts in 2015, up from 273 the year before and just 174 in 2013 -- a 79 percent jump, according to state and federal data obtained by the Herald. The reported numbers, however, may be only a fraction of the actual problem, according to doctors, providing another devastating but often overlooked consequence of the opioid scourge that has ravaged the Bay State [Massachusetts].""In many ways, one of the greatest infectious disease public health threats, given the size of the epidemic, the liver disease it is responsible for, the liver cancer it is responsible for,"" said Kevin Cranston, the director of the Department of Public Health [DPH]'s Bureau of Infectious Disease and Laboratory Sciences. ""The data are clear to us that the opioid epidemic is the major contributor. The rise is especially great among those younger than 30. While DPH is still reviewing final data, the number of chronic -- or long-term -- hepatitis cases among those between 15 and 29 years old is expected to top 2600 in 2015, or roughly 700 more than in 2007,"" according to Cranston.But as the state's heroin problem continues to take a deadly toll -- there were more than 1600 fatal overdoses in 2015 and nearly 1000 through June 2016 -- the connected spike in hepatitis has not grabbed nearly as much attention. Dr. Arthur Kim of Massachusetts General Hospital's Division of Infectious Diseases said that could be due in part to hepatitis's ""silent nature"" as it could show little to no symptoms at 1st and when it is most contagious. How the feds have reported acute cases has also limited how many are actually counted to date. ""Even the reported cases represent a small proportion of the true number of cases,"" Kim said. ""And most of the cases that we see are between ages 18 and 30.""Screening for the disease, while improved, also isn't as robust as it should be, said Dr. David Yassa, an infectious disease physician at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. ""The majority of people with hep C in this country are walking around without knowing that they have it,"" he said. The disease's spread -- often through shared needles, syringes or even tools people use to heat heroin -- highlights the impact of needle exchange programs. The state currently funds 6, including in Boston, Provincetown and as far west as Northampton, while 3 more in North Adams, Gloucester and Greenfield have received local approval but have yet to launch, according to DPH.But other places hit hard, such as the Merrimack Valley and other parts of Cape Cod, still lack them, said Dr. Alysse Wurcel, an infectious disease physician at Tufts Medical Center, who added that some communities have fought against a program landing in their backyard. ""There are places who have few to no needle exchanges but who desperately need them,"" Wurcel said. ""But it's not as easy as saying it simply needs to happen.""[Byline: Matt Stout]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[There is not much more to say. In the absence of a vaccine, infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/224>.]
