Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/salmonella-uptick-in-london-ontario-some-cases-linked-to-babylon-pizza-and-shawarma-44929/> Salmonella uptick in London, Ontario------------------------------------The Middlesex-London Health Unit is continuing its investigation into the unusually high number of salmonellosis cases reported to it over the last couple of weeks. As of today, 8 Sep 2016, the Health Unit has been notified of 37 confirmed, 6 probable and one suspect case of salmonella infection since 18 Aug 2016.There was no clear link between the surprising number of cases early in the investigation, but reports of 2 individuals with salmonella infections who had recently eaten at London's Babylon Pizza and Shawarma, caught investigators' attention. Public Health Inspectors visited the restaurant on 25 Aug 2016 and working with the operator conducted a thorough cleaning and disinfection of the facility. Inspectors have conducted daily inspections since then and continue to provide food handler education to staff at the restaurant. While it is important to note that not all of the salmonellosis cases can be linked to Babylon Pizza and Shawarma, extensive interviews and follow-up calls with those who became ill led Health Unit staff to conclude that 24 of the cases are associated with the eatery. There have been no reports of salmonellosis infection occurring in people who ate food at Babylon Pizza and Shawarma after 25 Aug 2016.Although a link for many cases has been established, the Health Unit remains vigilant and continues to seek other potential sources of contamination. ""We rely on food premises operators to maintain the safety of the food they serve every day. Through our inspections, the education we provide and the resources we have available, there's an expectation they will follow safe food handling practices,"" says David Pavletic, Manager of Food Safety and Healthy Environments at the Middlesex-London Health Unit. The measures Babylon's owners have put in place since we started working closely with them, show their commitment to making sure proper food handling practices are in place.""When the 9 salmonellosis cases reported in September 2016, and those associated with Babylon Pizza and Shawarma are excluded, the remaining 11 cases reported in August 2016 are close to the 5-year average of 9 cases for that month.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The serotype of the salmonella involved is not stated. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/260>.]
