WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update - 271 (based on data up to 21 Aug 2016)--------------------------------------------------------SummaryInfluenza activity varied in countries of temperate South America and increased steadily in the last few weeks in South Africa and Oceania. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere was at inter-seasonal levels.- In temperate South America, there was a decreasing trend in influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity levels throughout most of the sub-region except in Chile where influenza-like illness (ILI), and laboratory confirmed influenza and RSV virus detections remained elevated. Influenza activity plateaued in Paraguay, while no influenza activity was reported in Uruguay. Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and A(H3N2)viruses co-circulated with influenza B viruses in Chile, with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 predominating. In Argentina however, influenza activity continued to decrease, though ILI and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) cases remained elevated. Respiratory syncytial virus activity remained elevated in the region but with no overall increase.- In the temperate countries of Southern Africa, influenza detections among ILI patients continued to rise, with a recent shift from influenza B to predominantly influenza A virus circulating. Among patients with pneumonia, the incidence of RSV detections continued to decline compared to recent reporting periods.- In Oceania, influenza virus activity increased over the last weeks. In recent weeks ILI rates increased sharply nationally in Australia with 50 percent of samples testing positive for influenza. Influenza A(H3N2) remained the dominant circulating influenza virus. In contrast, in New Zealand ILI consultation rates remained below the seasonal baseline level, though with 60 percent of ILI samples tested being positive for influenza.- In the Caribbean countries, influenza virus activity remained low. Detection of non-influenza respiratory viruses continued at low levels in most of the countries. In Suriname, the number of SARI cases and hospitalizations increased with RSV predominating.- In Central America, influenza virus activity remained low but in most of the countries, detections of non-influenza respiratory viruses stayed elevated with RSV predominating.- In tropical South America, influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and RSV virus detections generally decreased in recent weeks or remained low in most of the countries. In Colombia, influenza activity continued to decrease while detection of RSV slightly increased. Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 detections continued to decrease in Brazil and Ecuador. In Peru, influenza activity increased during the last week with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus and influenza B virus co-circulating.- In tropical countries of South Asia, influenza activity was generally low with seasonal influenza A and B viruses co-circulating in the region.- In South East Asia, there has been an increase in influenza detection in recent weeks, with seasonal influenza A and B co-circulating.- In the northern temperate and central tropical regions of Africa, influenza activity was generally low with influenza A(H3N2) virus detections predominant in Western Africa, among the few countries reporting data during this period. In East Africa, Kenya reported a greater number influenza viruses, predominantly influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and A(H3N2) , whereas Madagascar reported mainly influenza B detections.- In North America and Europe, influenza activity was low with influenza B predominant. ILI levels were below seasonal thresholds.- Influenza activity was low in temperate Asia.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 63 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 8 Aug 2016 to 21 Aug 2016 (data as of 2 Sep 2016 04:27:13 UTC).The WHO GISRS laboratories tested more than 36019 specimens during that time period. 2173 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 1524 (70.1 percent) were typed as influenza A and 649 (29.9 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 390 (30.7 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 880 (69.3 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 39 (23.2 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 129 (76.8 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Only some regions have reported increased ILI activity with a general upsurge in influenza A(H3N2) as compared to influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and influenza B. Some areas reported RSV activity as well. No novel influenza viruses reported in this period. - Mod.UBA]
