Live Science [edited]<http://www.livescience.com/56031-chickenpox-school-bus.html>Chickenpox Virus Spreads Through School Bus-------------------------------------------A small outbreak of chickenpox was traced back to a single school bus in Michigan, and highlights the importance giving kids the chickenpox vaccine, according to a new report.Health officials in rural Muskegon County, Michigan, were alerted to a suspected case of the chickenpox in an 8-year-old last December [2015] after the child was sent home from school, according to the report of the outbreak from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), published today (8 Sep 2016).Shortly afterward, 3 more kids came down with the illness, the researchers wrote. The link among the cases appeared to be the school bus that all 4 children rode to and from school each day, according to the report. The kids didn't interact socially in school or have classes or lunch together, the researchers noted.Chickenpox outbreaks are rare, because most children are now vaccinated against the virus. At the school in the report, 95 percent of the students were fully vaccinated, meaning they had received both doses of the vaccine, as recommended, the researchers said. Another 3 percent of students at the school had received one shot, the researchers noted.No other cases of chickenpox were diagnosed in the school for the rest of the year, according to the report.The health officials investigating the outbreak revealed that the 1st child to get sick had not been vaccinated, and that the child's 4 siblings (also unvaccinated) had all also recently been kept home from school because of a rash that looked like chickenpox.Among the 3 children who likely caught the virus on the school bus, one had been fully vaccinated, according to the report. Full vaccination is between 88 and 98 percent effective at preventing chickenpox, according to the CDC.The other 2 children, who were siblings, had not been vaccinated, the investigators wrote. Those children later spread chickenpox to their 17-month-old sibling, according to the report.Chickenpox is caused by the varicella-zoster virus. The same virus also causes shingles in adults. In this case, a shingles infection turned out to be the source of the chickenpox infection: The 1st child's parent had a shingles infection several weeks before the children developed chickenpox, according to the report.Before the chickenpox vaccine was developed, the virus spread easily from kid to kid, especially in schools. However, now that most kids are vaccinated against the virus, it may be increasingly likely that kids, particularly those who are unvaccinated, will get the virus from adults who have shingles, rather than from other kids, the researchers wrote.The researchers mentioned only one previous report, which occurred in China, of chickenpox spreading on a school bus. Because school buses put kids in close proximity to each other, however, doctors and public health officials investigating similar outbreaks might want to consider these vehicles as a possible risk factor, the report said.[Byline: Sara G. Miller] --Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Chickenpox is most contagious from 2 to 3 days before the rash appears until all the blisters have crusted over. So in those early infectious days, the disease is not evident and transmission readily occurs. About 14 to 16 days after contact with a person infected with the virus, the 1st symptoms of chickenpox usually develop. Most people feel sick and have a fever, a decreased appetite, a headache, a cough, and a sore throat. Some children get the chickenpox rash without 1st having the early symptoms.The chickenpox virus (varicella-zoster) can spread easily from one person to another. It most often spreads through the respiratory tract, such as mucous membranes of the mouth and nose. You also can get chickenpox through the air from an infected person's sneezing or coughing. Less often, chickenpox is spread when fluid from a chickenpox blister gets on your skin. In rare cases, a person can get chickenpox from the fluid of shingles blisters [which appears to be the origin of the first case described above]. The chickenpox vaccine is more than 95 percent effective in preventing a severe chickenpox infection. However, 10 to 30 percent of children who have received the vaccine will develop mild chickenpox symptoms after exposure to a person with chickenpox. A map of the United States showing the location of Michigan can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/225>. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3087>.]
