MLive [edited]<http://www.mlive.com/news/kalamazoo/index.ssf/2016/09/lab_tests_confirm_west_nile_vi.html>An Allegan County [Michigan] horse was euthanized earlier this week [week of 5 Sep 2016] after it was unable to get to its feet in the pasture and suffered other critical neurological symptoms, a veterinarian said. Laboratory work confirmed [Thu 8 Sep 2016] that the horse had West Nile virus, a disease carried by mosquitoes that can affect humans and other animals.Veterinarian Jim Connell of Town and Country Veterinary Hospital in Allegan said the horse, a 15 year old gelding, had been vaccinated against the disease in the past but was not up-to-date on the protective vaccination. He said horses should generally be vaccinated yearly, for at least 3 years, and urged horse owners whose animals are not up-to-date on their shots to consult with their veterinarians about the possible need for booster shots.According to the Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development's website, West Nile virus (WNV) is a mosquitoborne virus that causes encephalitis (inflammation of the brain) and/or meningitis (inflammation of the lining of the brain and spinal cord). Most horses bitten by carrier mosquitoes do not develop disease, the information said, but of those that do, about a third develop severe disease and die or are so affected that euthanasia is required. The time between the bite of an infected mosquito and when clinical signs appear, ranges from 3 to 14 days.A vaccine for horses is available only through licensed veterinarians. Horses vaccinated against other viral illnesses are not protected against West Nile infection, according to the website.On 22 Jul 2016, the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services confirmed the state's 1st human case of West Nile virus (WNV) in 2016. The infected resident is an elderly adult from Livingston County. There is no available vaccine to prevent the disease in humans.[byline: Rosemary Parker]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The state of Michigan can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/4551>. Allegan County in the south west part of Lower Michigan can be seen on the map at <http://geology.com/county-map/michigan-county-map.gif>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJThe importance of vaccination cannot be over emphasized. It is the single best way to prevent this disease in your animals. However, no human vaccine for West Nile virus (WNV) currently exists. In humans prevention includes using DEET mosquito spray, avoiding dusk and dawn when the mosquitoes are out.Although WNV became an endemic disease in the United States many years ago, it is sad that animals suffer and may end up dead because a vaccine was not given. Prevention is a simple vaccine.WNV is the leading cause of arbovirus encephalitis in horses and humans in the United States. Since 1999, over 25 000 cases of WNV encephalitis have been reported in US horses. Horses represent 96.9 per cent of all reported non-human mammalian cases of WNV disease.This virus has been identified in all of the continental United States, most of Canada, and Mexico. Several Central and South American countries have also identified WNV within their borders. The virus is transmitted from avian reservoir hosts by mosquitoes (and infrequently by other bloodsucking insects) to horses, humans, and a number of other mammals. West Nile virus is transmitted by many different mosquito species and this varies geographically. The virus and mosquito host interactions result in regional change in virulence of the virus and no prediction can be made regarding future trends in local activity of the viruses. Horses and humans are considered to be dead-end hosts for WNV; the virus is not directly contagious from horse to horse or horse to human. Indirect transmission via mosquitoes from infected horses is highly unlikely as these horses do not circulate a significant amount of virus in their blood.The case fatality rate for horses exhibiting clinical signs of WNV infection is about 33 per cent. Data have supported that 40 per cent of horses that survive the acute illness caused by WNV still exhibit residual effects, such as gait and behavioral abnormalities, 6 months post-diagnosis. Thus vaccination for West Nile virus is recommended as a core vaccine and is an essential standard of care for all horses in North America.There are 3 challenge models that have been used to license currently available vaccines. The mosquito and needle challenge were the 2 models used in early studies. These challenge models result in 90 per cent of non-vaccinated control horses developing viremia, while only 10 per cent of these horses demonstrated clinical disease. More recently, the intrathecal (infection in the atlanto-occipital space) challenge model has been employed. In this model, 70 to 90 per cent of non-vaccinated control horses become viremic and 90 to 100 per cent develop grave signs of encephalomyelitis.West Nile virus vaccines are licensed either as 1) an aid in prevention of viremia; 2) an aid in reduction of viremia, encephalitis, and clinical disease; 3) an aid in prevention of disease, viremia, and encephalitis; or 4) an aid in prevention of viremia and mortality, and an aid in reduction of severity of clinical disease.Vaccines--------4 USDA licensed vaccines are currently available (2 are inactivated whole WNV vaccines; one is a non-replicating live canary pox recombinant vector vaccine, and one is an inactivated flavivirus chimera vaccine).Inactivated whole virus vaccines with an adjuvant. Label instructions call for a primary vaccination series of 2 intramuscular injections administered 3 to 6 weeks apart followed by a 12-month revaccination interval. These products are labeled as an aid in prevention of viremia or as an aid in prevention of viremia and mortality and an aid in reduction of severity of clinical disease.Recombinant canary pox vaccine with protective antigens expressed in a vaccine strain canary pox vector which does not replicate in the horse. The vaccine contains an adjuvant. Label instructions call for a primary vaccination series of 2 intramuscular injections administered 4 to 6 weeks apart, followed by a 12-month revaccination interval. The product is labeled as an aid in prevention of disease, viremia, and encephalitis.Inactivated flavivirus chimera vaccine with protective antigens expressed in a vaccine strain yellow fever virus vector and contains an adjuvant. Label instructions call for a primary vaccination series of 2 intramuscular injections administered 3 to 4 weeks apart followed by a 12-month revaccination interval. This product is labeled as an aid in reduction of disease, encephalitis and viremia.All of the current WNV vaccine products carry 1 year duration of immunity, with challenge, consistent with their respective label claims. - Mod.TG]
