European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) [edited]<http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/crimean-congo-haemorrhagic-fever-spain-risk-assessment.pdf>ECDC has assessed the risk associated with the occurrence of 2 cases of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in Spain. This is the 1st detection of autochthonous human cases of CCHF in Spain and the probability of further infections there remains low. However, additional sporadic cases may occur in the future.The different risks associated with tickborne transmission, nosocomial transmission, and transmission via substances of human origin are outlined in the document, together with suggested options for response.Main conclusions and options for response-----------------------------------------On 31 Aug 2016 the autonomous Community of Madrid, Spain reported 2 cases of infection with Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus. The primary case is a 62 year old man with potential exposure to CCHF virus in the countryside in the province of Ì vila ([Castile and Leon], Spain).The secondary case is a 50 year old health care worker who attended the primary case during his ICU admission. These are the 1st autochthonous clinical cases of CCHF in Spain and in south western Europe.Recent detection of CCHF virus in ticks from the autonomous Community of Extremadura in western Spain indicates the circulation of CCHF virus among wildlife. Therefore, the occurrence of CCHF virus infection is not an unexpected event in Spain. Nosocomial transmission of CCHF can occur even in a non-endemic region when appropriate infection prevention and control (IPC) measures have not been observed.The probability of CCHF virus infection in Spain is low. However, other sporadic cases are possible. The risk of further human-to-human transmission in hospital settings can be significantly reduced by applying timely appropriate IPC measures. The options for risk reduction are suggested as follows:- enhanced awareness of the importance of early diagnosis and laboratory confirmation among healthcare providers in areas with potential circulation of CCHF virus. Timely and appropriate case management is crucial for the reduction of case fatality;- standard precautions, preferably combined with contact and droplet precautionary measures, should be taken when caring for patients presenting with haemorrhagic fever syndrome, including when there is suspicion of CCHF;- laboratory tests on patient samples present a high risk of transmission and should only be conducted under appropriate biological containment conditions;- as a precautionary measure, risk groups should be informed about the mode of transmission and urged to comply with advice on the prevention of tick bites. Risk groups in potentially affected areas are primarily: people working in close proximity to animals, especially livestock (such as agricultural workers in animal husbandry or slaughterhouse workers, veterinarians); people exposed to tick-to-human transmission through their outdoor activities (such as hunters, forest workers, hikers); and healthcare providers at risk of human-to-human transmission;- in order to better target preventive measures and raise clinical awareness, areas with CCHF virus circulation and areas suitable for CCHF circulation in the Iberian Peninsula should be defined by multidisciplinary investigations; in particular performing CCHF risk mapping, ecological and environmental studies, serosurveys in host species, and entomological investigations;- ribavirin for post-exposure prophylaxis should be considered after high-risk exposure, despite the low quality of evidence for its effectiveness;- genome sequencing of the CCHF viruses detected in Spain will provide additional information on the genetic diversity of viruses circulating in the Iberian Peninsula;- Since sporadic cases of the disease in affected areas in Spain are possible, transfusion and transplant professionals should be aware of possible CCHF exposure in affected areas. However, no specific measures for the safety of substances of human origin (SoHO) are recommended at this stage;- further studies on the ecology of CCHF in the Iberian Peninsula are needed to delineate the areas at risk for tickborne transmission.Event background information----------------------------On 31 Aug 2016, the autonomous Community of Madrid reported 2 cases of infection with CCHF virus.The primary case was a 62 year old man. The onset of symptoms was on 16 Aug 2016. He was admitted to the hospital on 18 Aug 2016 and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) of the Infanta Leonor Hospital in Madrid on 19 Aug 2016. The case was transferred to a high-level isolation ICU at the Gregorio MaraÌ±Ì n Hospital in Madrid on 23 Aug 2016. He died on 25 Aug 2016. The patient was hiking in Ì vila province on 14 Aug 2016 where he most likely got infected through contact with a tick (through a tick bite or by crushing a tick).The secondary case is a 50 year old health care worker who took care of the patient while in the ICU between 19 and 23 Aug 2016. The secondary case developed symptoms on 27 Aug 2016 and was hospitalised in an isolation unit. The case is presenting with severe disease but with favourable evolution according to the medical team.Neither of the 2 cases had a recent travel history outside Spain before the onset of symptoms. Both cases were confirmed by PCR at the National Centre for Microbiology. At-risk contacts have been identified and their follow-up is ongoing. On 6 Sep 2016, all risk contacts were asymptomatic.Spanish national authorities are closely monitoring this event. They have issued communication material on prevention and control of CCHF for health professionals and the general public. They are coordinating surveillance, prevention and control activities at different levels and sectors including environmental, human and animal health sectors as well as entomological and animal surveillance in areas at risk of CCHF virus circulation.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka[This is a comprehensive assessment document and can serve as a guideline for the health authorities in the country as well as the region.A very important action point highlighted in the assessment is implementation of preventive measures through mapping of the areas with CCHF virus circulation and areas in the region using multidisciplinary approach, including CCHF risk mapping, ecological, and environmental studies, serosurveys in host species, and entomological/vector investigations. - Mod.UBAMaps of Spain can be seen at <http://www.ezilon.com/maps/images/europe/political-map-of-Spain.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/2506>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
