CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) News<http://www.cbc.ca/beta/news/canada/north/nunavut-botulism-fermented-seal-1.3758946>Nunavut's health department is warning people in Sanikiluaq not to eat fermented seal, after it received reports of people becoming sick with botulism after consuming the meat. In a news release, the department says it is investigating the reports.Botulism is a rare but serious paralytic illness, according to Health Canada. The spores of the _Clostridium botulinum_ bacterium can be found in soil and dust and tends to cause problems when certain foods are stored or prepared improperly.Health Canada says food may not look or smell spoiled but it can make people sick.Nunavut's Department of Health says people that have eaten fermented seal should watch for symptoms, such as:- diarrhea, nausea and vomiting;- feeling weak or tired;- blurred vision;- weakness of the arms, chest muscles, and legs;- trouble breathing.Anyone with symptoms should contact the health centre in Sanikiluaq. The department is also asking anyone with leftover fermented seal that could be used for testing to call their regional environmental health officer.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Maps of Canada can be seen at <http://mapsof.net/uploads/static-maps/Canada_Provinces_and_territories_map.png> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/16751>.The following publication summarizes 2 decades of botulism in Canada, a great majority occurring due to type E in the native population,Leclair D, Fung J, Isaac-Renton JL, et al. Foodborne botulism in Canada, 1985-2005. Emerg Infect Dis. 2013; 19(6): 961-8; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3713816/>Abstract--------During 1985-2005, a total of 91 laboratory-confirmed outbreaks of foodborne botulism occurred in Canada; these outbreaks involved 205 cases and 11 deaths. Of the outbreaks, 75 (86.2 per cent) were caused by _Clostridium botulinum_ type E, followed by types A (7, 8.1 per cent) and B (5, 5.7 per cent). Approximately 85 per cent of the outbreaks occurred in Alaska Native communities, particularly the Inuit of Nunavik in northern Quebec and the First Nations population of the Pacific coast of British Columbia. These populations were predominantly exposed to type E botulinum toxin through the consumption of traditionally prepared marine mammal and fish products. 2 botulism outbreaks were attributed to commercial ready-to-eat meat products and 3 to foods served in restaurants; several cases were attributed to non-Native home-prepared foods. 3 affected pregnant women delivered healthy infants. Improvements in botulism case identification and early treatment have resulted in a reduction in the case-fatality rate in Canada.The following was abstracted from a 2001 CDC report on foodborne botulism in the native American population in Alaska and underscores changes in the fermentation techniques which appear to have increased the risks of this intoxication(<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5032a2.htm>):This report illustrates how the use of nontraditional fermentation methods is associated with foodborne botulism in Alaska. Botulism results from eating preformed toxin produced by _Clostridium botulinum_. Botulism intoxication can result in death, which most often is caused by respiratory failure. The latent period is typically 12-36 hours but can range from 6 hours to 10 days (1). _C. botulinum_ and closely related organisms produce toxins designated as types A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. Human botulism is most commonly caused by types A, B, and E. Type E is associated with foods of marine or freshwater origin. Alaska's foodborne botulism rates exceed those in any other state and are among the highest in the world (1). During 1950-2000, Alaska recorded 226 cases of foodborne botulism from 114 outbreaks. All patients were Alaska Natives, and all cases with known causes were associated with eating fermented foods (1,2). Approximately 27 per cent of US foodborne botulism cases occur in Alaska.In traditional fermentation, food is kept in a grass-lined hole in the ground or a wooden barrel sunken into the ground or is placed in a shady area above ground for several weeks to months. Since the 1970s, however, plastic or glass containers have been used and fermentation has been done above ground or indoors. The anaerobic condition of sealed containers and warmer temperatures make fermentation more rapid and production of botulism toxin more likely (3-5). These nontraditional methods have been associated with increased botulism rates in Alaska during 1970-1989 (4,5). Although a plastic container was not used in this outbreak, the beaver tail and paw were fermented in a closed rice sack and stored in a warm area.Early diagnosis and antitoxin treatment have contributed to the decline of the case fatality rate from approximately 31 per cent during 1950-1959 to no deaths in Alaska since 1994 (1). However, Alaska continues to have high foodborne botulism rates because fermented foods are part of Alaska Native culture. In a 1999 survey, 107 (77 per cent) of 140 Alaska Natives reported having eaten fermented foods at least once in their lifetime (3).References----------1. Beller M. Botulism in Alaska: a guide for physicians and health-care providers -- 1998 update. Anchorage, Alaska: Alaska Department of Health and Social Services, 1998.2. Wainwright RB, Heyward WL, Middaugh JP, et al. Food-borne botulism in Alaska, 1947-1985: epidemiology and clinical findings. J Infect Dis. 1988; 157: 1158-62.3. Chiou L, Hennessy T, Horn A, Carter G, Butler J. A survey of knowledge, attitudes, and practices related to fermented foods known to cause botulism among Alaska Natives of southwest Alaska. [Abstract]. Presented at the 2nd International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases, Atlanta, Georgia, July 2000.4. Eisenberg MS, Bender TR. Plastic bags and botulism: a new twist to an old hazard of the north. Alaska Med 1976; July: 47-9.5. Shaffer N, Wainwright RB, Middaugh JP. Botulism among Alaska Natives: the role of changing food preparation and consumption practices. West J Med. 1990;153: 390-3.- Mod.LL]
