Science 353 (6304: 1129-1132 DOI: 10.1126/science.aah6157 [edited]<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6304/1129>Peter Abbink, Rafael A Larocca, Rafael A De La Barrera, et al. Protective efficacy of multiple vaccine platforms against Zika virus challenge in rhesus monkeys.AbstractZika virus (ZIKV) is responsible for a major ongoing epidemic in the Americas and has been causally associated with fetal microcephaly. The development of a safe and effective ZIKV vaccine is therefore an urgent global health priority. Here we demonstrate that 3 different vaccine platforms protect against ZIKV challenge in rhesus monkeys. A purified inactivated virus vaccine induced ZIKV-specific neutralizing antibodies and completely protected monkeys against ZIKV strains from both Brazil and Puerto Rico. Purified immunoglobulin from vaccinated monkeys also conferred passive protection in adoptive transfer studies. A plasmid DNA vaccine and a single-shot recombinant rhesus adenovirus serotype 52 vector vaccine, both expressing ZIKV premembrane and envelope, also elicited neutralizing antibodies and completely protected monkeys against ZIKV challenge. These data support the rapid clinical development of ZIKV vaccines for humans.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is reassuring to see the vaccine candidates moving ahead successful so far. Significant additional steps are required before FDA approval, and that will take time. - Mod.TY]******[3] Genital and central nervous infectionsDate: September 2016 [ahead of print]Source: Emerg Infect Dis. [edited]<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/22/12/16-1280_article#suggestedcitation>Nicastri E, Castilletti C, Balestra P, Galgani S, Ippolito G. Zika virus infection in the central nervous system and female genital tract.On 9 Apr 2016, a 32 year old woman from Italy traveled to Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic. She worked as a volunteer nurse in the outpatient clinic of a primary school of a nongovernmental organization based in Italy. She returned to Italy on 17 Apr [2016]. She did not have sexual intercourse during her stay abroad.On 26 Apr [2016], she was referred to the travel clinic of the National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani in Rome for a febrile syndrome with rash, generalized headache, and weakness, which started on 21 Apr [2016]. Approximately 24 hours later, she was admitted to the institute's medical facility for a suspected neurologic involvement. At admission, she had abnormal gait, strong asthenia, and a disseminated pruritic rash on her face, abdomen, chest, and arms, but she did not have a fever.During physical examination, the patient was alert and fully oriented. Temperature was 36.9 deg C [about 98.4 deg F], pulse rate 90 beats/min, blood pressure 100/60 mm Hg, and respiratory rate 20 breaths/min. She had a diffuse erythematous macular rash and bilateral nonpurulent conjunctival hyperemia without meningeal signs. Findings of a neurologic examination of the upper limbs were within reference ranges. Muscular strength was reduced in both legs (left more than right), whereas tendon reflexes and all sensory modalities were within reference ranges. Results of a contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spinal cord (on day 7), nerve conduction studies and electromyography (on day 8), and an electroencephalogram (on day 16) were within reference ranges. A lumbar puncture (on day 7) showed normal cell counts (less than10 cells/mL), a normal glycorrachia/glycemia ratio (more than 0.5), and a slight increase in protein concentration (0.48 g/L [reference range 0.32-0.80 g/L]) in cerebrospinal fluid. Complete neuropsychologic examinations (on days 9 and 10) showed mild deficits in attention and mental processing speed and mental flexibility and moderate deficits in verbal and nonverbal memory tasks.Real-time reverse transcription PCR (rRT-PCR) results for dengue viruses 1-4 and chikungunya virus were negative in serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), whereas Zika virus RNA was detected in serum (day 6), urine (up to day 27), CSF (day 6), saliva (up to day 13), and vaginal swab (up to day 13). Specific dengue and chikungunya IgG and IgM were not detected in serum and CSF. Zika virus IgM was detected in serum starting on day 6. Zika virus-specific antibodies in serum were confirmed by microneutralization assay.Starting on day 7, intravenous polyvalent immunoglobulins were administered (0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days); no adverse events were observed. A 2nd neuropsychologic examination was performed on day 16 and indicated persistent impairment in memory performances and an improvement in mental concentration and flexibility tasks (see Technical Appendix in the URL above).A second lumbar puncture (on day 17) showed an increased cell count (70 cells/mL, mostly lymphocytes), and CSF was negative for Zika virus RNA by rRT-PCR. The patient was discharged on day 20; she showed a progressive neurologic recovery starting on day 16. At 60-days follow-up visit, no neurologic deficits were reported.During the 2013-2014 outbreak of Zika virus in French Polynesia and in the context of the 2015-2016 Zika virus circulation, an apparent increase in Guillain-Barre syndrome incidence was reported. Few anecdotal cases of encephalopathy in patients with Zika virus infection have been recently described in affected countries: 1 case in a man on a 4-week cruise through an area in the South Pacific that included New Caledonia, Vanuatu, the Solomon Islands, and New Zealand in 2015; and 2 cases in Martinique in February 2016. Recently, Zika virus has been detected in the genital tract of a virus-infected woman after Zika virus had disappeared from blood and urine, and a suspected case of Zika virus by sexual transmission from a woman to a man has been reported in New York City.In our patient, Zika virus RNA was found in different systems, including the central nervous system and the genital tract. Recently, a mouse model of Zika virus infection by vaginal exposure demonstrated that Zika virus replicated within the genital mucosa, persisted postinfection, and was detected in the fetal brain of the mice. In our case, the patient reported early neurologic symptoms and moderate memory impairment in neuropsychologic examinations, all features consistent with the diagnosis of Zika virus-related encephalitis, which represents a rare atypical presentation, particularly in areas to which Zika virus infection is not endemic. A recent article shows that Zika virus can infect adult murine neural stem cells, leading to cell death and reduced proliferation . It raises the possibility that Zika is not simply a transient infection in adult humans and that exposure in the adult brain could have an effect on long-term memory or the risk for depression.Our case highlights the potential for Zika virus neurotropism and the need for early identification of Zika virus-related neurologic symptoms. Moreover, the presence of Zika virus in the genital tract supports the recommendation of safe sex practice for women returning home from areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall[This report reinforces 2 important, although less common, features of Zika virus infections -- central nervous systems (CNS) and female genital components. This suggests that clinicians become aware that CNS symptoms may occur. Additional testing of female genital mucosa in futures cases will provide useful information about the risk of female to male sexual transmission of Zika virus. - Mod.TY]******[4] Patient with no known risk factorsDate: Tue 13 Sep 2016Source: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6536e4.htm?s_cid=mm6536e4_e#suggestedcitation>Brent C, Dunn A, Savage H, et al. Preliminary findings from an investigation of Zika virus infection in a patient with no known risk factors -- Utah, 2016.-------------------------------------On 12 Jul 2016, the Utah Department of Health (UDOH) was notified by a clinician caring for an adult (patient A) who was evaluated for fever, rash, and conjunctivitis that began on 1 Jul [2016]. Patient A had not traveled to an area with ongoing Zika virus transmission, had not had sexual contact with a person who recently traveled, and had not received a blood transfusion, organ transplant, or mosquito bites. Patient A provided care over several days to an elderly male family contact (the index patient) who contracted Zika virus abroad. The index patient developed septic shock with multiple organ failure and died in the hospital on 25 Jun 2016. The index patient's blood specimen obtained 2 days before his death had a level of viremia approximately 100 000 times higher than the average level reported in persons infected with Zika virus. Zika virus infection was diagnosed in patient A by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) testing on a urine specimen collected 7 days after symptom onset. In addition, a serum specimen collected 11 days after symptom onset, after patient A's symptoms had resolved, was positive for antibodies to Zika virus by Zika immunoglobulin M (IgM) capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (MAC-ELISA) and had neutralizing antibodies detected by plaque-reduction neutralization testing (PRNT). Working with Salt Lake and Davis County Health Departments, UDOH requested assistance from CDC with an investigation to determine patient A's exposures and determine a probable source of infection.The investigation consisted of 4 components: 1) an epidemiologic evaluation of family contacts of the index patient, 2) a serosurvey of health care workers who provided direct care to the index patient before his death, 3) a community serosurvey around the locations where the index patient had resided, and 4) active vector surveillance near the residences of the index patient and patient A. For the purpose of this investigation, a family contact was defined as a person who resided in the same household as the index patient or had direct contact with his body fluids (that is, tears, conjunctival discharge, saliva, vomitus, urine, or stool) during the period when he was most likely viremic, including a few days before his illness onset and until his death.19 family contacts, including patient A, were identified and interviewed, and provided blood or urine specimens for testing. 13 family contacts reported hugging and kissing the index patient's face. Five family contacts reported being present while the index patient's stool, urine, or vomitus was being cleaned. Patient A reported hugging and kissing the index patient, in a similar fashion to other family contacts, and assisted hospital personnel in holding the index patient while his stool was being cleaned, but did not have direct contact with stool. Other than patient A, all family contacts were negative for Zika virus infection by rRT-PCR or MAC-ELISA on specimens obtained roughly 2-3 weeks after last exposure.Health care workers who provided care to the index patient and residents living within a 200 meter [220 yard] radius of the 2 homes where the index patient resided before becoming hospitalized were interviewed to assess risk factors for Zika virus infection and were offered Zika virus testing. As of 22 Aug [2016], 86 health care worker contacts have been identified and interviewed to assess types of patient interactions and to quantify level of exposure to the index patient's body fluids. A total of 238 households were approached, and all available and consenting household members were interviewed using a standardized questionnaire about risk factors for mosquitoborne transmission. All health care workers and community members who provided blood specimens are being tested for Zika virus IgM antibodies using a MAC-ELISA. Urine specimens were also collected from any persons who reported Zika virus-like symptoms in the 14 days before their interview. Testing is incomplete, but as of 22 Aug [2016] it has not revealed any persons with Zika virus infections.Local mosquito abatement districts worked in collaboration with vector entomologists from CDC to conduct larval and adult mosquito surveillance near the index patient's and patient A's residences. Door-to-door surveys around neighborhood homes were conducted, and a variety of mosquito traps (e.g., Biogents Sentinel, gravid, light traps baited with carbon dioxide, and ovitraps) were deployed. Larval specimens obtained in the field were reared to the adult stage for identification. Adult mosquitoes are in the process of being identified and tested for Zika virus RNA by rRT-PCR, but no _Aedes aegypti_ or _Aedes albopictus_ mosquitoes have been identified as part of this investigation.It remains unclear how patient A was infected; however patient A was known to have had close contact (i.e. kissing and hugging) with the index patient while the index patient's viral load was found to be very high. Although it is not certain that these types of close contact were the source of transmission, family contacts should be aware that blood and body fluids of severely ill patients might be infectious. Given recognition of high levels of viremia during illness, it is essential that health care workers continue to apply standard precautions while caring for all patients, including those who might have Zika virus disease.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[How patient A became infected remains unknown. If patient A was not wearing gloves while attending the highly viremic index case, it is not unreasonable to assume that his hands became contaminated with virus from urine or tears with subsequent transmission to eyes or mouth. - Mod.TY]******[5] Non-human primate modelDate: Mon 12 Sep 2016Source: Nature Medicine doi:10.1038/nm.4193 [edited]<http://www.nature.com/nm/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nm.4193.html>Kristina M Adams Waldorf, Jennifer E Stencel-Baerenwald, Raj P Kapur, Colin Studholme, Erica Boldenow, et al. Fetal brain lesions after subcutaneous inoculation of Zika virus in a pregnant nonhuman primate.AbstractWe describe the development of fetal brain lesions after Zika virus (ZIKV) inoculation in a pregnant pigtail macaque. Periventricular lesions developed within 10 d and evolved asymmetrically in the occipital-parietal lobes. Fetal autopsy revealed ZIKV in the brain and significant cerebral white matter hypoplasia, periventricular white matter gliosis, and axonal and ependymal injury. Our observation of ZIKV-associated fetal brain lesions in a nonhuman primate provides a model for therapeutic evaluation.ConclusionsOur findings of arrested fetal brain growth and viral neuro-invasion are consistent with the congenital ZIKV syndrome seen in humans. The marked lag in fetal BPD growth by ultrasound analysis reflects the arrest of white matter expansion detected by MR imaging. A similar arrest in BPD has been reported in human pregnancy with presumed ZIKV infection in the 3rd trimester.. In the context of ZIKV infection, this change in fetal brain growth would be very concerning for impending microcephaly if given sufficient time, but our experimental duration was relatively short (a single pregnancy trimester). Viral neuro-invasion was supported by detection of ZIKV RNA in the fetal and maternal brain, histopathology and fetal serology. The highest copy number of ZIKV RNA was found in placental chorionic villous tissue, which may be the source of the prolonged viremia that has been described in both pregnant humans and rhesus macaques. In summary, clinical findings and evidence for viral neuro-invasion is highly consistent with vertical transmission, congenital ZIKV infection and fetal brain injury in our model.We describe the 1st case of fetal brain injury in a nonhuman primate after maternal infection with ZIKV. Arrested fetal brain growth, white matter injury and detection of ZIKV RNA in multiple fetal organs (brain, liver and placenta) are similar to features of the congenital ZIKV syndrome in humans. The distribution of white matter injury in this case is predicted to result in visual-field loss (injury to optic tracts) and neurodevelopmental delay. A similar but more severe pattern of white matter injury, with involvement of the occipital horns of the lateral ventricle, was also seen in a Brazilian child with congenital ZIKV infection . We did not observe many of the severe findings associated with the congenital ZIKV syndrome, but we speculate that this may be due to terminating the study 6 weeks after inoculation because the pregnancy was nearing the due date.Nonhuman primates are ideal for studying infection in pregnancy because they most closely mimic human gestation in many key respects, including placentation, gray/white matter ratios in the brain and timing of neurodevelopment. The pigtail macaque is known to be susceptible to multiple Flaviviridae family members (such as DENV, Japanese encephalitis virus and hepatitis C virus), which makes them an excellent model for ZIKV infection. In summary, we demonstrate that a clinically inapparent maternal ZIKV infection during pregnancy has the capacity to result in fetal brain injury in a pregnant pigtail macaque. Further studies are needed to investigate the mechanisms of fetal injury. The pigtail macaque model may have significant utility for testing novel vaccines and therapeutics to prevent the congenital ZIKV syndrome.--communicated by;ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts<promed@promedmail.org>andProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall******[6] Neurological outcomes of infantsDate: November 2016 [ahead of print]Source: Emerg Infect Dis. [edited]<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/22/11/16-0956_article#suggestedcitation>Silva AAM, Ganz JSS, Sousa PS, Doriqui MJC, Ribeiro MRC, Branco MRFC, et al. Early growth and neurologic outcomes of infants with probable congenital Zika virus syndrome.AbstractWe report the early growth and neurologic findings of 48 infants in Brazil diagnosed with probable congenital Zika virus syndrome and followed to age 1-8 months. Most of these infants had microcephaly (86.7 per cent) and craniofacial disproportion (95.8 per cent). The clinical pattern included poor head growth with increasingly negative z-scores, pyramidal/extrapyramidal symptoms, and epilepsy.--communicated by;ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall[The emotional, social, and economic impacts on the families from the long-term care that these infants will require are tragic. In an interview, Dr Neil Silverman, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at UCLA's School of Medicine and a member of the American Congress of Obstetrics and Gynecology's Zika Expert Work Group, who was not part of the study, said: ""What is known for sure is that the children in the study, and others like them, will need lifelong services from specialists, including neuropediatricians, ophthalmologists, physiotherapists, nutritionists, nurses, and psychologists"" (<http://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2016/09/14/493791751/what-doctors-learned-from-42-infants-with-microcephaly>). - Mod.TY]
