The Seattle Times [edited]<http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/health/uw-medical-center-reports-2nd-death-from-legionnaires-bacteria-is-in-water-supply/>The bacteria that cause legionnaires' disease have been detected in part of the water supply at the University of Washington Medical Center [UWMC], where officials said a 2nd person linked to an outbreak has died.An ice machine and 2 sinks in cardiac units of the hospital's Cascade Tower were found to be contaminated with the germs [legionella] that can cause the potentially deadly form of pneumonia, officials said [Wed 14 Sep 2016]. Signs warning patients, family, and staff not to use drinking fountains and sinks were posted on Wednesday throughout the tower.Cascade Tower is supplied with city of Seattle drinking water, but there's likely little risk of spread to surrounding areas, said Dr Tom Staiger, UWMC medical director. ""We don't have any indication that people in the general public should be worried about this,"" Staiger told reporters at a news conference.Hospital officials have trucked in ""a lot"" of bottled water for an outage in the Cascade Tower that could last at least 2 weeks while testing continues. The tower is served by one of 5 separate city water feeds for different sections of the hospital. Water in one system does not mix with the others, officials said.The announcement follows reports of 2 previous cases of legionnaires' disease in patients treated in the UWMC cardiac care units: a 30 year old woman reported on [26 Aug 2016], and a 50 year old man reported [6 Sep 2016], health officials have said. The man died [on 8 Sep [2016], King County health officials said.The case announced [on Wed 14 Sep 2016] occurred in a woman in her 50s. She died [on 27 Aug 2016]. Infection with legionella bacteria was detected during an autopsy, and health officials said it may have contributed to her death.The patients were infected with _Legionella pneumophila_, one of about 60 different types of the bacteria. Tests of 15 other patients in the UWMC units have shown no evidence of infection, Staiger said. Officials are testing patients with symptoms of respiratory problems and culturing samples to check for legionella bacteria.With assistance from Larry Lee, owner of Pacific Industrial Hygiene, UWMC has intensified testing of water systems throughout the hospital, with focus on the areas where the bacteria were detected. In the Cascade Tower, new filters are being installed on sinks, fountains, and showers. ""We are doing everything that we can identify, that is reasonably possible to put in place, to reduce the risks to patients, family, and staff,"" Staiger said.Public Health-Seattle & King County is assisting with the investigation. The water restrictions were put in place on Tuesday evening [13 Sep 2016], as soon as legionella was confirmed; other patients could still test positive for infection, said Dr Meagan Kay, a county medical epidemiologist. In addition, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been notified of the findings.Further test results that could specify what kind and quantity of legionella bacteria were found could take 2 weeks to come back, said Lee.Ice machines have been linked to past episodes of legionella infections -- and deaths -- in hospitals. The machines often contain water reservoirs located next to compressors, which can warm the water enough to allow any bacteria present to grow, investigations have found.The legionnaires' cases come more than a year after UWMC was cited by the state Department of Labor & Industries [L&I] for violations that included detection of low levels of legionella bacteria in a hospital cooling tower, a specialized device that helps heat and cool buildings year round. The hospital was fined USD 54 000 for other infractions, but nothing for the legionella problem. Cooling towers have been associated with outbreaks of legionnaires' disease, which is caused when people breathe in mist contaminated with the bacteria.The type of legionella detected in the L&I investigation was different from that in the current outbreak, leading UWMC officials to focus the latest investigation on the direct environment and patients. Officials have been testing the cooling towers quarterly. In January [2016], tests showed evidence of small amounts of legionella bacteria, 120 colony-forming units per milliliter of water. Another test in July [2016] showed 520 colony-forming units per milliliter. The level of concern -- at which employees require protection -- is 1000 colony-forming units per milliliter, according to federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration guidelines. Officials said the July reading may have taken too long to arrive at a testing site in Virginia, allowing bacteria to grow.Legionnaires' disease is reported in about 5000 people a year in the US, according to CDC. In Washington State, the number of cases varies each year from fewer than 10 to more than 50. In 2014, 63 cases of legionnaires' disease were reported, including 8 deaths, according to the state health department. It's a relatively rare disease. Most people don't get sick if they're exposed to the bacteria, but some might, particularly if they're older than 50 [years of age], current or former smokers, have a chronic lung disease or have immune systems weakened by disease or medications.[byline: JoNel Aleccia]--communicated by:Michael P OwenSeanetBellevue, WAUSA<owenmp@seanet.com>******[2]Date: Wed 14 Sep 2016 4:35 PM PDTSource: Q13 FOX [edited]<http://q13fox.com/2016/09/14/legionnaires-outbreak-linked-to-ice-machine-sinks-at-uw-medical-center/>The water in some parts of the University of Washington Medical Center is infected with the bacteria linked to legionnaires' disease. A 2nd person in the outbreak has died; now a 3rd person has been [identified as] having legionnaires' disease.Health officials said the water supply on the 5th floor of the Cascade Tower is now off-limits and could be for weeks. While doctors said the problem shouldn't worry the general public, patients recovering in the cardiac unit are at the highest risk for infection. ""We need to take appropriate measures to eliminate the source,"" said Dr Megan Kay with Public Health-Seattle/King County.Officials from both UWMC and the health department identified a 3rd case of legionnaire's disease after 2 cases were first reported last week [week of 5 Sep 2016]. 2 patients have died and doctors said legionnaire's disease could be a cause. ""Legionnaires' is not generally transmitted person to person,"" said Kay. ""It's found in the water.""Doctors said all the patients were inside the hospital's cardiac unit in the Cascade Tower. Inspectors said water quality tests found the bacteria in an ice machine and a couple of sinks. ""We're taking all the necessary steps we can identify to find the cause of this [bacterial contamination] and to treat our water source,"" said UWMC medical director Dr Tom Staiger. Another 15 patients in the cardiac wing have so far tested negative for the disease, said doctors.Health officials said water has been shut off to all the fixtures on the 5th floor until special filters can be installed -- and as a precaution, drinking water is being shipped in. ""We are looking at all potential pieces of equipment and water sources where an exposure could have taken place,"" said Staiger. Officials said the water system in the entire hospital is now under extra scrutiny with new rounds of quality tests while they figure out how to eliminate the bacteria.Symptoms of legionnaires' disease are similar to pneumonia with fever, cough, shortness of breath, and muscle aches.Hospital officials vowed to do whatever it takes to eliminate the risk of infection -- but for now showers, sinks, and drinking fountains are off-limits and could be until October [2016] when new tests results come back.[byline: Steve Kiggins]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[An epidemiological and environmental investigation for the source of legionella organisms should be initiated when the 1st case of hospital-acquired legionellosis is identified. Genotyping patient and environmental isolates will help to confirm the environmental source.Legionella are embedded in a biofilm that lines the inner walls of the plumbing system's pipes and containers. Warm water temperatures of 25-40 deg C (77-104 deg F) support the highest concentrations of the organism in plumbing systems. The news reports above say that so far an ice machine and 2 sinks in University of Washington Medical Center Cascade Tower hospital's cardiac units were found to be contaminated with legionella. Debilitated hospitalized patients who are prone to aspiration may develop legionnaires' disease following aspiration of legionella-contaminated potable water, as well as inhaling a fine spray (aerosols) from water sources containing legionella. During the epidemiological and environmental investigation for the source of legionella organisms, patients should be prohibited from taking showers, and should consume sterile water only until legionella becomes undetectable by culture of the hospital water. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/55573>.]
