Emerg Infect Dis. 2016 Nov. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2211.161015 DOI: 10.3201/eid2211.161015 [edited]<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/22/11/16-1015_article>Lednicky J, Beau De Rochars VM, Elbadry M, Loeb J, Telisma T, Chavannes S, et al. Mayaro virus in child with acute febrile illness, Haiti, 2015. ---------------------------------------------------------------------AbstractMayaro virus has been associated with small outbreaks in northern South America. We isolated this virus from a child with acute febrile illness in rural Haiti, confirming its role as a cause of mosquitoborne illness in the Caribbean region. The clinical presentation can mimic that of chikungunya, dengue, and Zika virus infections.[Background]Mayaro virus (MAYV; genus _Alphavirus_, family _Togaviridae_) is a single-stranded positive RNA virus that was 1st isolated in Trinidad in 1954 and is one of the viruses that comprise the Semliki Forest virus complex. Its transmission cycle is thought to occur mainly through mosquito vectors, especially those of genus _Haemagogus_, but _Aedes_ spp. mosquitoes may also be competent vectors. The natural reservoirs of MAYV have been reported to be sylvatic vertebrates, mainly nonhuman primates but also birds and reptiles.From May 2014 through February 2015, blood samples were obtained from 177 children who met the criteria for acute undifferentiated febrile illness. The protocol for sample collection was approved by the University of Florida Institutional Review Board and the Haitian National Institutional Review Board. Written parental informed consent was obtained from parents or guardians of all study participants. Plasma samples were screened by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for CHIKV and dengue virus (DENV); samples that were negative for CHIKV were cultured by using cell lines and conditions as previously described. Zika virus and enterovirus D68 have been previously isolated from members of this school cohort. We report detection of MAYV in a child as part of this screening process.ConclusionsAlthough MAYV was originally isolated in Trinidad in 1954, subsequent reports of illness associated with this virus have tended to be associated with small, occasional outbreaks (30-100 cases) in northern South America, within and close to the Amazon forest. Signs and symptoms reported in association with MAYV infection include arthralgias, eye pain, fever, headache, myalgias, rash, and occasionally nausea and vomiting, photophobia, abdominal pain, cough, diarrhea, sore throat, and bleeding gums. A fatal infection associated with hemorrhagic fever has been reported. MAYV infections are probably underdiagnosed because of confusion with other mosquitoborne virus infections, especially dengue fever, which is endemic to the same areas. The emergence of CHIKV has further added to this confusion, especially because prolonged arthralgia is reportedly associated with CHIKV and MAYV infections.Our findings suggest that MAYV is actively circulating in the Caribbean region and that there may be a link between the strain circulating in Haiti and the strains that have been circulating in Brazil since isolation of the virus in the 1950s. The patient from whom we isolated the organism had fever and abdominal pain but no rash or arthralgia. However, given that the patient was co-infected with DENV-1, it is difficult to separate out symptoms that are specific for MAYV infection. Of note, the clinic physician empirically diagnosed typhoid and treated the patient accordingly. The patient was from a rural/semi-rural area of Haiti, reflecting an ecologic setting that differs greatly from sylvan Amazon regions where many of the other reported MAYV infections have occurred. Little is known about vectors for MAYV in Haiti; potential animal reservoirs, if any, remain to be identified.The recent emergence of Zika virus infection in the Caribbean region, and its identification as a major cause of birth defects, has brought a great deal of attention to arboviruses. Our findings highlight the multiplicity of arbovirus species in Haiti and the evolutionary relatedness among the viruses in Haiti and those circulating in Brazil, in keeping with prior work on Zika virus. Findings also underscore the complexity of the interactions among different species and the apparent proclivity for Zika virus/DENV and MAYV/DENV co-infections. Although a better understanding of Zika virus infection is clearly needed, careful studies of other arboviruses (and their vectors and possible reservoirs) in these same geographic regions are correspondingly needed. We do not know if MAYV has epidemic potential; however, in light of recent observations with CHIKV, DENV, and Zika virus and the potential for transmission of MAYV by _Aedes_ and _Haemagogus_ spp. mosquitoes, inclusion of MAYV in studies of arbovirus transmission seems to be indicated.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The detection of Mayaro virus in Haiti for the 1st time raises some interesting questions. Given its ability to be transmitted by a variety of mosquitoes and to infect a variety of vertebrates -- can it be maintained in a wide variety of ecosystems in the Americas, in addition to the Amazon Basin? Is it endemic in Haiti, but previously undetected? Is it present but so far undetected in other Caribbean islands, given its discovery in Trinidad and now, presence in Haiti? The discovery of MAYV in Haiti indicates that it needs to be included in the battery of diagnostic tests of febrile diseases.This same report was also contributed by Roland HÌ bner, and ProMED-mail thanks him. - Mod.TYA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/25>.]
