Torquay Herald Express [edited]<http://www.torquayheraldexpress.co.uk/warning-issues-by-public-health-england-over-infection-outbreak-linked-to-a-piercing-aftercare-spray/story-29721792-detail/story.html>A warning has been issued by Public Health England (PHE) to those who have recently had body piercings about an unsafe cleansing spray provided by piercing studios across the country for aftercare use, which may cause severe infection. PHE is strongly advising people to stop using the product and, if concerned they may have an infection, to seek medical help urgently.The product, linked to cases of serious infection, has been provided by piercing studios in many parts of the country. It is a 100 ml bottled aftercare saline spray and is manufactured by Lion Care Products Ltd. However, there is no consistent brand or label being used on the product. Some labels, using only black and white lettering, will have the manufacturer's trading name, Body Art Supplies, or may carry the Lion Care name; other studios' labels will use neither, but possibly just their own studio name or brand on the label. If unsure, people should stop using the spray immediately and return it to their local studio.The spray may be linked to 26 cases of a severe infection due to _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_, across England. Investigations are ongoing to confirm this link, and we continue to monitor for further cases. To date, all have been ear infections, with the majority of cases occurring in the East Midlands and South East of England. However, the product is known to have been distributed widely across England, therefore more cases are likely.The product has also been distributed in Scotland but to a much lesser extent. The cases have occurred in people where piercings were undertaken between mid-July 2016 and late August 2016; however, there may be other more recent cases which have not yet been reported.PHE advice on aftercare following body piercings is to follow the guidelines provided on the Chartered Institute of Environmental Health website:It is expected that some swelling and soreness from new piercings may occur. However, signs of infection to be aware of include:- swelling and redness that increases around the wound;- a severe burning or throbbing sensation round the site;- increased tenderness and becoming increasingly painful to touch;- an unusual discharge (yellow or green) with an offensive smell;- raised temperature and fever.Dr Richard Puleston, consultant at Public Health England said: ""Infection is not uncommon following piercings, but the particular type of bacteria linked to this outbreak can cause severe infection. It is important that people take extra care in ensuring any piercing is properly cleansed and to follow professional advice available from local environmental health teams. If people are concerned about possible infection, they are strongly advised to seek medical attention urgently.""PHE is continuing to investigate and is liaising with the appropriate authorities in the Devolved Administrations to ensure that the contaminated product is removed from piercing studios, and, wherever possible, clients are contacted by their studio and advised to cease using the product.[byline: HE Daniel Clark]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Although not specifically stated, the _P. aeruginosa_ infection involved here may be perichondritis, an infection of the lining of the ear cartilage associated with trauma, often caused by upper ear piercing through the ear cartilage. As many as 70 per cent of perichondritis cases are caused by the organism associated with this outbreak, _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_, a waterborne organism that commonly contaminates cleaning solutions (or in this posting sprays) used in the aftercare of piercing. The cartilage infection requires aggressive antimicrobial therapy, usually intravenously, and drainage if necessary, and can easily lead to enough damage to the cartilage to cause prominent deformities of the external ear. - Mod.LLSee too the official report from PHE <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/health-protection-report-volume-10-2016/hpr-volume-10-issue-31-news-16-september>. - Mod.SHA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>.]
