The Meridian Star, Mississippi Today report [edited]<http://www.meridianstar.com/news/state/increased-risky-sex-could-have-led-to-syphilis-spike/article_d0225864-2d89-53dc-91a0-ae63cd37252b.html>Cases of syphilis have skyrocketed by nearly 60 percent in Mississippi this year [2016], according to data released by the Mississippi Department of Health on [Thu 15 Sep 2016]. So far in 2016, 214 people have been diagnosed with primary and secondary syphilis in Mississippi, compared with 136 people during the same period a year ago [2015].These numbers are part of a national upward trend that state health officials said could be linked to an increase in the use of Truvada, a drug that when taken by an HIV-negative person greatly reduces their risk of contracting HIV. However, Truvada does not protect against any other sexually transmitted diseases [STDs], according to the Food and Drug Administration [FDA].""If you're on treatment and you're virally suppressed, there's little to no (risk of HIV) transmission if you have risky sex,"" Nick Mosca, director of the HIV and sexually transmitted disease office at the department of health, told Mississippi Today of Truvada's effectiveness. ""But the flipside ... is that while we've been focusing on HIV, syphilis is a different animal. And Truvada isn't going to protect you from it.""When contacted, a spokesperson for Gilead, the company that manufactures Truvada, said the company is working to increase awareness of the risks of contracting sexually transmitted diseases while taking a pre-exposure prophylaxis, a kind of drug known in the pharmaceutical industry as a PrEP. ""Gilead supports PrEP education through community-based projects and programs. We award grants to organizations that provide PrEP education to populations at high risk for HIV infections that are traditionally under-served,"" said Michele Rest, an associate director of public affairs for Gilead.Mississippi mirrors national trends of syphilis rates. Although nationwide data for 2015 and 2016 is not available, the total number of cases of syphilis reported to the US Centers for Disease Control increased 12.3 percent between 2013 to 2014, going from 56 482 cases to 63 450 cases. Truvada was approved in 2012.""What we're speculating is that people may be changing their behaviors and maybe not using condoms and not thinking about the other STDs,"" Mosca said. These other sexually transmitted diseases, specifically gonorrhea and chlamydia, have also ticked up in the last few years, both in state and nationally. As of August 2016, 4383 cases of gonorrhea and 12 847 cases of chlamydia had been reported in Mississippi, increasing from 3582 cases of gonorrhea and 12 008 cases of chlamydia in 2013, the next most recent year these statistics were available from the department of health. Nationally, gonorrhea and chlamydia rose as well, going up 5.8 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, between 2013 and 2014.This uptick is particularly troubling, say health officials, because rates of syphilis transmission in Mississippi had been on a steady decline until 2013. That year, only 87 cases of primary and secondary syphilis were reported in state, a 7-year low. Just one year later the numbers had more than doubled to 192.""HIV gets the attention,"" Mosca said. ""But (syphilis) is a problem, and we want people to be aware of that.""Mississippi Today is a nonpartisan nonprofit digital news and information resource that covers state and local government affairs and community issues.[Byline: Larrison Campbell]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[There is an ongoing worldwide increase in the incidence of primary and secondary syphilis among men who have sex with men (MSM); see ProMED-mail posts below. The news report above suggests that this rise may be due in part to the use of pre-exposure HIV prophylaxis, or PrEP, which is a way to prevent HIV infection for people who do not have HIV but who are at substantial risk of getting it by engaging in risky sexual activity while not using condoms (<http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/PrEPguidelines2014.pdf>). PrEP involves taking every day a combination of 2 anti-HIV drugs tenofovir and emtricitabine (brand name Truvada). Truvada was approved by the FDA for reducing the risk of sexually acquired HIV Infection on 16 Jul 2012.Truvada was first approved on 2 Aug 2004 for the treatment of HIV infection in combination with other anti-HIV drugs. Effective HIV treatment can reduce the HIV load to the point that HIV infection is no longer transmissible, even with condomless high-risk sexual behavior, but at the same time not preventing acquisition of other sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as syphilis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia.Other factors that could account for the rising incidence of syphilis include use of psychoactive ""party drugs"" and the use of Internet chat rooms to meet sex partners and smartphone apps, such as Grindr and Tinder, which facilitate having multiple anonymous sex partners.Increased diagnostic testing for STIs in MSM could also contribute to the increased incidence of syphilis (<http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/specialpops.htm#msm>). Screening at least once a year for syphilis, chlamydia, and gonorrhea is recommended for all sexually active gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (MSM). MSM who have multiple or anonymous partners should be screened more frequently for STDs (that is, at 3-to-6 month intervals). - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/226>.]
