The Avenue Mail [edited]<http://www.avenuemail.in/jamshedpur/new-cases-japanese-encephalitis-dengue-surface/98362/>Japanese encephalitis, (JE) the viral disease caused by a flavivirus that infects animals and humans are on the rise in the city [Jamshedpur, East Singhbhum district, Jharkhand]. In the last 48 hours about several cases of JE have come to the light forcing the health officials here to remain vigilant.Sahir Pall, district officer for the Centre's Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP), said have come across 14 suspected cases Japanese encephalitis (JE) admitted in various hospitals, including at MGM Medical College and Hospital and Mercy Hospital beside 20 suspected cases of dengue.""All the 14 patients having symptoms of JE are from the rural area of the district. We have the blood samples of these patents to the medical college for the test,"" said Pall, adding that all the patients suffering from suspected JE are out of danger and are improving fast.Japanese encephalitis (JE) is a disease [virus] spread through mosquito bites. Symptoms usually take 5-15 days to develop and include fever, headache, vomiting, confusion, and difficulty moving. Symptoms that develop later include swelling around the brain. It is a serious disease that may even cause death.The civil surgeon's office said that some suspected JE cases in considerable number have come to the notice, here. ""We are looking at the cases and steps are being taken to increase the surveillance across the district. Awareness is the best medicine to prevent the spread of any form of viral infection and we urge upon the people to practice, among other things, storing water scientifically in their respective places,"" said a medical officer at the malaria department.According to experts, drastic change in weather conditions and fast depleting forest cover may have let the virus that hitherto confined to wild animals, prey on the human beings. Unusual weather conditions seem to have triggered viral fevers on a large scale with scores of children and adult being admitted to the hospital with such complaints.""Jusco [Jamshedpur Utilities and Services Company] had been carrying out spraying of anti-larvicidal chemicals and fogging under its command areas while the local urban bodies along with District Filaria Department have been spraying anti-larvicidal and also distributing pamphlets informing masses not to let water accumulate in unused containers and complain about clogging of drains,"" said the official.From district health department records, in the year 2010, over 10 000 viral cases were reported in the district in the monsoon period. In 2012, the number of viral cases came down to 7000 during the monsoon period. There were 2 Japanese encephalitis cases in the same year though no death was reported in either of the cases.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This is the 2nd report of Japanese encephalitis cases in Jharkhand state. There were 4 suspected cases reported on 20 Jul 2016 (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20160721.4361308). JE virus is endemic in northeastern India, where the JE virus transmission season is underway. This report indicates that all the reported cases are JE only and does not attribute any cases to the non-specific acute encephalitis syndrome that has been reported in many previous reports from northeastern India.It is not indicated if these cases have been laboratory confirmed as JE virus infections. There is no indication of whether the JE cases reported above had been vaccinated, or whether a vaccination campaign in the state has been carried out in the recent past or is planned.  More information addressing these questions would be greatly appreciated.Maps of India can be accessed at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/994>. - Mod.TY]
