Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/scombroid-risk-prompts-recall-of-thai-tuna-in-singapore-62058/>The Singapore AgriFood and Veterinary Authority (AVA) issued a recall of Farmland brand canned ""Tuna Chunks in Polyunsaturated Oil"" imported from Thailand after testing revealed high levels of histamine. The histamine levels raised the risk of scombroid fish poisoning.Scombroid fish poisoning is an acute syndrome characterized by facial flushing, sweating, rash, a burning or peppery taste in the mouth, diarrhea, and abdominal cramps, and usually resolves within several hours without medical intervention.This is due to histamine toxicity from the ingestion of spoiled fish. The fish do not contain high levels of histamine when caught, instead they have histidine in their flesh. Histamine is produced during spoilage from common surface bacteria on the fish. The histamine is not destroyed by cooking.The type of fish implicated in this food poisoning are mainly of the scombroid type; tuna, mackerel, skipjack, and albacore. Some non-scombroid fish such as mahi-mahi, bluefish, anchovies, and herring have been implicated.Risks are greatest for fish imported from tropical and semi-tropical areas and fish caught by recreational fisherman who may not have the refrigerated storage for larger fish.In addition to the symptoms above, which generally appear quite rapidly (within minutes to hours), more severe symptoms may include difficulty in swallowing, respiratory distress, and blurred vision. People on isoniazid may have more severe symptoms. Anti histamines are given in severe cases. Deaths are rare.Adequate and rapid refrigeration of the fish will prevent spoilage.The diagnosis is made on symptoms and tends to be fairly evident. Several people may come down with this at the same time.There is no laboratory testing on the patient that is considered helpful. Measuring histamine levels on the suspected fish can be used for confirmation.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[""What is scombroid fish poisoning?Scombroid fish poisoning is a syndrome resembling an allergic reaction that occurs within a few hours of eating fish contaminated with histamine. There are no specific diagnostic tests for scombroid fish poisoning in humans, and diagnosis is generally made based on symptoms and recent dietary history.What are the symptoms of scombroid fish poisoning?Illness typically begins minutes to hours after ingestion of the toxic fish and resembles a histamine reaction. Associated symptoms include tingling and burning sensations around the mouth, facial flushing and sweating, nausea and vomiting, headache, palpitations, dizziness and rash. Some patients report that the implicated fish has a peppery or a metallic taste.How do people get scombroid fish poisoning?Fish in the Scombridae family (tuna, mackerel, skipjack and bonito) are the most common vehicles for scombroid fish poisoning. Other fish, however, have been implicated in scombroid fish poisoning, and include mahi-mahi, bluefish, marlin, and escolar. When susceptible fish are not promptly and continuously refrigerated, bacteria can metabolize naturally occurring histamine to produce scombrotoxin, which consists of histamine and other amines. The presence of 50 parts per million (ppm) or more histamine in fish is indicative of decomposition whether or not there is gross evidence of spoilage, such as bad odor. When illness results from consumption, histamine levels in implicated fish have commonly been at least 200 ppm and often greater than 500 ppm. Histamine is heat resistant and can, therefore, cause illness even when fish is properly canned or cooked thoroughly. While some contaminated fish will not show any outward signs of spoilage, others will show such signs as a bad odor. Cooked fish that has spoiled may have a ""honey combed"" appearance.How is scombroid fish poisoning treated?Scombroid fish poisoning is usually mild and duration is short, making treatment unnecessary. For more severe cases or inpatients with underlying medical conditions, oral antihistamines may be beneficial.How common is scombroid fish poisoning?The occurrence of scombroid fish poisoning is worldwide. In California, scombroid fish poisoning is reportable; in 1999 and 2000, there were 17 and 26 cases of scombroid fish poisoning reported in California, respectively.""Portion of this comment were extracted from:<https://www.cdph.ca.gov/HealthInfo/discond/Documents/ScombroidFishPoisoningFactSheet.pdf>. - Mod.TG][The above article does not mention any cases of scombroid poisoning related to this product.  One wonders if there have been cases that led to the testing and recall. - Mod.MPP]A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/150>.]
