WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update - 272 (based on data up to 4 Sep 2016)-------------------------------------------------------SummaryInfluenza activity varied in countries of temperate South America, is ongoing in South Africa and increased steadily in the last few weeks in Oceania. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere was at inter-seasonal levels.- In temperate South America, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity decreased throughout most of the sub-region. In Chile, influenza-like illness (ILI) and laboratory confirmed influenza and RSV virus detections remained elevated; influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 was predominant with co-circulation of A(H3N2)viruses and influenza B viruses. Influenza activity was low in Argentina and Paraguay, while no influenza activity was reported in Uruguay. In Argentina however, ILI and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) cases remained elevated. Respiratory syncytial virus activity remained elevated in the region.- In the temperate countries of Southern Africa, influenza activity is ongoing, with co-circulation of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09, A(H3N2) and B viruses.- In Oceania, influenza virus activity increased slightly in recent weeks, but seems to have reached its peak. Influenza A(H3N2) remained the dominant circulating influenza virus. In contrast, in New Zealand ILI consultation rates remained below the seasonal baseline level, although 43 percent of ILI samples tested positive for influenza, with influenza A(H3N2) predominating.- In the Caribbean countries, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained low throughout most of the sub-region. The exception was Suriname where the number of SARI cases and hospitalizations continued to increase with parainfluenza virus predominating in the recent weeks. In Central America, influenza virus activity remained low but in most of the countries, detections of non-influenza respiratory viruses stayed elevated with RSV predominating.- In tropical South America, influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and RSV virus detections generally decreased in recent weeks or remained low in most of the countries. Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 detections continued to decrease in Brazil and Ecuador. In Peru, influenza activity continues to decrease, with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and influenza B viruses co-circulating.- In tropical countries of South Asia, influenza activity was generally low with seasonal influenza A and B viruses co-circulating in the region.- In South East Asia, there was a decreasing trend in influenza detection in recent weeks, with co-circulation of seasonal influenza A and B viruses.- Sporadic cases of influenza A(H3N2) virus infection were reported from northern, middle and western Africa in recent weeks, among the few countries reporting data during this period. In East Africa, ongoing elevated influenza B detections were reported by Madagascar. Kenya reported decreasing influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and A(H3N2) activity.- In North America and Europe, influenza activity was low with few influenza virus detections. ILI levels were below seasonal thresholds.- Influenza activity was low in temperate Asia.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 68 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 22 Aug 2016 to 4 Sep 2016 (data as of 16 Sep 2016, 3:54:50 AM UTC).The WHO GISRS laboratories tested more than 42 184 specimens during that time period; 2911 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 2271 (78 percent) were typed as influenza A and 640 (22 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 301 (18.6 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 1313 (81.4 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 44 (24.9 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 133 (75.1 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Overall, Influenza A/H3N2 and Influenza B Victoria lineages dominated during the reporting period with variable activity in countries in South America and increase detection rates in Oceania. The influenza activity was low in most of Africa except south, as well as south Asia and Europe. No novel subtypes reported in this period. - Mod.UBA]
