Reuters [edited]<http://tinyurl.com/hnxuzwj>Health workers in western Niger are racing to contain an outbreak of Rift Valley fever that has killed at least 21 people over the past month, an aid agency said on Wednesday [21 Sep 2016].The highly contagious disease, which is transmitted to humans by mosquitoes or close contact with contaminated animals, has infected 52 people in Niger's western region of Tahoua since late August, the country's health ministry said.The Alliance for International Medical Action (ALIMA) and Niger's health authorities have opened an emergency treatment center, in the region's hardest-hit district of Tchintabaraden, to look after the infected and stop the disease from spreading.""Unfortunately, the 52 severe cases officially registered at present only represent the tip of the iceberg,"" ALIMA's medical coordinator Oumarou Maidadji said in a statement.With no specific treatment or effective human vaccine, Rift Valley fever can cause blindness and severe haemorrhaging, leading the victim to vomit blood or even bleed to death.Herders and farmers [and veterinarians] are deemed at higher risk of infection from the disease, which can devastate livestock.Niger's health ministry said people in the Tahoua region, especially pastoralists, should avoid handling meat from infected animals, boil raw milk before consumption, and ensure that the corpses of dead animals are buried carefully.ALIMA is also working with local partners and doctors to provide a mobile clinic which travels the region to inform the public about the disease and how to prevent it from spreading.[Byline: Kieran Guilbert, Edited by: Jo Griffin]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[An epizootic of Rift Valley fever (RVF) involving cattle, sheep and goats in Tahoua, the same region as the human cases,  above, in western Niger was reported on 19 Sep 2016. It is not surprising that human cases are occurring in the same region as well. Mod CRD's excellent earlier comment stated, ""Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a peracute or acute zoonotic disease of domestic ruminants. The virus is confined to the African continent and Arabian Peninsula. It is caused by a single serotype of a mosquito-borne virus of the _Bunyaviridae_ family (genus _Phlebovirus_). The disease occurs in climatic conditions favouring the breeding of mosquito vectors and is characterised by abortion, neonatal mortality and liver damage. The disease is most severe in sheep, goats, and cattle. Older non-pregnant animals, although susceptible to infection, are more resistant to clinical disease. There is considerable variation in the susceptibility to RVF of animals of different species. Camels usually have an inapparent infection with RVF virus (RVFV), but sudden mortality, neonatal mortality, and abortion occur and abortion rates can be as high as in cattle.Humans are susceptible to RVFV and are infected through contact with infected animal material (body fluids or tissues) or through bites from infected mosquitoes. RVFV has also caused serious infections in laboratory workers and must be handled with biosafety and biocontainment measures. It is recommended that laboratory workers be vaccinated if possible.""It would seem that a vaccination campaign in the region for RVF would not only address the livestock problem, but would reduce human risk of infection as well. Maps of Niger can be accessed at http://www.ezilon.com/maps/images/africa/political-map-of-Niger.gif and http://healthmap.org/promed/p/32064.- Mod. TY]
