Daily Mail [edited]<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3798248/Santa-s-slay-Russia-slaughter-250-000-reindeer-Christmas-animals-amid-anthrax-outbreak-fears.html?ITO=1490&ns_mchannel=rss&ns_campaign=1490>A region in Russia is to slaughter a quarter of a million reindeer by Christmas because it has ""too many animals."" The current population of 730 000 is ""unsustainable"" and risks new outbreaks of deadly anthrax disease unless there is a rapid cull, say officials in the region of Yamelo-Nenets.The reindeer will be electrocuted by a high voltage charge to the forehead to immobilise them before their antlers are removed, and their throats slit. Blood is often drained from the animals and sold to China for use in traditional medicines, including impotence cures for men.The massive cull in the region -- which straddles the Arctic and is larger than France -- follows 3 separate summer outbreaks of anthrax, which led to the deaths of a 12-year-old boy and 2349 reindeer. The cause was a hot weather, which awoke an infection buried in the permafrost more than 70 years ago.The region, which includes the gas-rich Yamal Peninsula, is famed for its nomadic reindeer herders, and there are warnings that this traditional way of life, which survived the Soviet era, is now under threat. Nikolai Vlasov, deputy head of Rosselkhoznadzor, Russia's state veterinary service, said: ""Reindeer livestock numbers in Yamal are too high. Strict new quotas are needed to stop the spread of disease,"" he said, according to The Siberian Times. ""The denser the animal population is, the worse the transfer of disease,"" he said. The number of animals should not surpass the new target. ""Otherwise, they will kill the pastures and later destroy the indigenous minorities of the North who will have nothing to live on."" Yamal was ""reaching a dangerous milestone,"" he said.Moss on which the reindeer feed has already been widely destroyed.Another option is to persuade herders to sell their prized reindeer in exchange for affordable mortgages on apartments, ending their centuries-old nomadic existence. Anthropologist Olga Murashko warned: ""I am very worried about the fate of the private herders, who still perpetuate the tradition of family and clan-based reindeer herding. Most of them have small herds of about a hundred deer. A huge number of nomads on the Yamal and Gydan peninsulas will lose their means of existence and opportunities to maintain their traditional way of life.""The proposals are due to be implemented within weeks, yet so far, there has been no outcry from animal rights groups.The traditional slaughtering season is November and December, and plans being drawn up envisage a huge increase in the number of reindeer being killed.[Byline: Gareth Davies]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: 20 Sep 2016Source: Express [edited]<http://www.express.co.uk/news/world/712689/Christmas-reindeers-butchered-killed-disease-anthrax-epidemic>Serbian officials have demanded a huge cull of a 250 000 reindeer by Christmas over the risk of an anthrax outbreak. Currently 730 000 animals are being kept in the Yamal Peninsula and the rest of the Yamalo-Nenets region. But [present] numbers are ""unsustainable"" according to officials, who have claimed the vast amount could risk disease spreading and chronic overgrazing.A number of proposals have since been put forward in a desperate bid to cull numbers, some more controversial than others.One scheme would see nomadic herders who give up their reindeer be rewarded, although not with cash but instead with affordable mortgages so they could buy new apartments [and jobs? - Mod.MHJ].Traditionally, slaughter season occurs between November and December, when the creatures will be given an electric shock to the head and slung upside down on a hanging line before having antlers removed and throat slit. This year's [2016] cull, however, comes after reindeer herds suffered from an outbreak of the deadly disease anthrax this summer. The so-called ""zombie"" disease killed 2349 deer and a young boy during the hot summer weather in 3 separate outbreaks.But officials have warned that the disease could spread further and infect more humans thanks to the growing number of reindeer, up from around 400 000 to more than 700 000. Nikolai Vlasov, deputy head of Russia's Federal Veterinary and Phytosanitary Surveillance Service, said: ""Reindeer livestock numbers in Yamal are too high. The more dense the animal population is, the worse the disease transfer medium, and the more often animals get sick. Density of livestock, especially in the tundra areas that are very fragile, should be regulated.""But there are also fears that the cull could destroy the age-old tradition of reindeer herding in Yamal, a name which means ""the end of the Earth."" Anthropologist Olga Murashko said: ""I am very worried about the fate of the private herders, who still perpetuate the tradition of family and clan based reindeer herding. ""Most of them have small herds of about a hundred deer.""She also expressed her concern at the short term nature of the plans, with the deer having to be culled before Christmas this year [2016]. The expert added: ""A huge number of nomads on the Yamal and Gydan peninsulas will lose their means of existence and opportunities to maintain their traditional way of life. Additionally, it is clear that within the short time frame given, the indigenous reindeer herders cannot be properly consulted on the administration's plans to annihilate a large number of reindeer.""[Byline: Vickie Oliphant]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[We need to step back a bit. It was claimed that this part of Siberia had not seen a case of anthrax in 50 years, so for a number of decades what may have been done or not done was adequate. We were informed that in 2007, it was hastily decided to not vaccinate the reindeer that year and that this non-vaccination policy continued right up to this epidemic. So it would seem that the then vaccination policy worked effectively. One may ask why annual vaccination should not be reinstated; epidemiologically, it would be logical anyway if for no other reason than the massive environmental contamination that followed the many deaths.Secondly, if there is sound evidence of over-grazing, they will need to reduce their numbers anyway, as the vegetation growing season is short, and it needs time to recover. This is something for the wildlife experts to ponder and decide upon.Speculatively, and based on what I have seen and read of in the Canadian North West Territories, I suspect that, over the years, they have been suffering from ""silent"" anthrax. In the NWT, the Canadians, as a result of their March darting and bleeding and brucella testing of wood bison, have come across individual bison with anthrax titres but in the absence of any known outbreaks in the previous summer; the Canadians fly regular weekly surveillance flights in the summer, checking each mob and looking for dead bison. They are very experienced at this. And we should also remember that, normally, the odd sporadic death of a reindeer could have gone unnoticed or unreported, and thus not checked. This would keep the disease ticking over. And with the hot summer they suffered this year [2016], the extra water would have encouraged the larger fly and mosquito hatch, which would have taken 3 sporadic deaths into 2.3 thousand because of the deer density. If they had been vaccinated, there would have been just a dozen or so, as in any vaccination programme, animals get missed.And if herds are culled, the owners need to be found jobs to replace the income lost. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/98>.]
