Bangkok Post [edited]<http://www.bangkokpost.com/learning/advanced/1092044/nan-food-poisoning-traced-to-eclairs-38-hospitalised>The number of people hospitalised after eating eclairs [a pastry filled with cream and chocolate] at branches of a big retail store in Nan township rose to 38 on Wed 21 Sep 2016, as health inspectors began a full inquiry. Dr Pongthep Wongwatcharapaiboon, deputy director of Nan Hospital, and a team of health officials inspected the production process for the eclairs at the Makro outlet in Muang district to find the cause of the food poisoning.Officials said that in all 38 people who purchased the cream puffs had sought treatment at several hospitals in 6 districts - Muang, Phu Phiang, Ban Luang, Mae Charim, Santisuk and Chiang Klang. Most patients bought the dessert from the same retail store in this northern province, Dr Pongthep said. Many suffered acute diarrhea, dizziness and vomiting, said the doctor.The hospital believed there might be some irregularities in the ingredients and production process, he said. If the dessert was contaminated with bacteria, consumers would develop symptoms in 6 hours to 2 days. But most patients quickly fell ill after eating, suggesting that there might be some chemicals in the ingredients, said the hospital's deputy director.Sakolkrit Sukhawattanakul, manager of the store's outlets in the North, said a thorough examination would be made of the production process to find out the exact cause of the food poisoning. Production and sale of the eclairs would cease until the matter is cleared up. He would visit the patients and take responsibility for the incident.[Byline: Rarinthorn Petcharoen and Terry Fredrickson]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The short incubation period with an illness presenting with emesis (vomiting) is likely to be caused by the ingestion of a staphylococcal enterotoxin.The following information regarding this entity is extracted from the US Food and Drug Administration's Bad Bug Book available at: <http://www.fda.gov/food/foodborneillnesscontaminants/causesofillnessbadbugbook/ucm070015.htm>:""In the diagnosis of staphylococcal foodborne illness, proper interviews with the victims and the gathering and analyzing of epidemiological data, are essential. Incriminated foods should be collected and examined for staphylococci. The presence of relatively large numbers of enterotoxigenic staphylococci is good circumstantial evidence that the food contains toxin. The most conclusive test is the linking of an illness with a specific food, or, in cases where multiple vehicles exist, the detection of the toxin in the food sample(s).""In cases where the food may have been treated to kill the staphylococci, as in pasteurization or heating, direct microscopic observation of the food may be an aid in the diagnosis. A number of serological methods for determining the enterotoxigenicity of _S. aureus_ isolated from foods, as well as methods for the separation and detection of toxins in foods, have been developed, and used successfully, to aid in the diagnosis of the illness. Phage typing may also be useful when viable staphylococci can be isolated from the incriminated food, from victims, and from suspected carriers, such as food handlers.""A toxin dose of less than 1.0 microgram in contaminated food will produce symptoms of staphylococcal intoxication. This toxin level is reached when _S. aureus_ populations exceed 100 000 per gram.""Foods that are frequently incriminated in staphylococcal food poisoning include meat and meat products; poultry and egg products; salads such as egg, tuna, chicken, potato, and macaroni; bakery products such as cream-filled pastries, cream pies, and chocolate eclairs; sandwich fillings; and milk and dairy products. Foods that require considerable handling during preparation, and that are kept at slightly elevated temperatures after preparation, are frequently involved in staphylococcal food poisoning.""A very short incubation of a vomiting-associated illness (less than 1 hour) also suggests that the etiology might have been heavy metal ingestion. A number of metals can cause this type of syndrome, which is usually caused by the ingestion of a liquid that had been kept in a metallic container. These metals include antimony, copper, tin, and zinc. The illnesses are usually self-limiting and require only symptomatic care. In addition to vomiting, other clues may include the liquid being described as having a metallic taste. Identifying the specific cause requires analysis of the food or liquid vehicle. Some potential differences in the illnesses exist between causes, including a longer incubation period (several hours) for zinc; vomiting and diarrhea for tin; and blue or green vomitus for copper. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/9385>.]
