Washington Post [edited]<http://tinyurl.com/z4x6dt5>A mysterious polio-like illness that paralyzes people may be surging this year [2016]----------------------------------------------------------------------Before dinner on 29 Jul 2016, a 3-year-old from Chesterfield, Virginia, seemed perfectly healthy. That evening, he vomited. When he woke up the next morning with a slight fever of 99 deg F [37.2 deg C], his mother figured that he was coming down with a cold. The next morning, she found him collapsed on his bedroom floor.""Mommy,"" she recalls him saying. ""Help me, help me."" The boy could barely stand when his mother picked him up, and his neck was arched backward. ""What was most alarming,"" she said, ""is he had no control over his right arm whatsoever.""In the hospital, he lost control of his right arm, then over his legs, and other muscles within a few days. He now can only wiggle a toe and move the left side of his face. He has been diagnosed with a mysterious, polio-like illness called acute flaccid myelitis (AFM), a condition that seems to be surging in 2016.Through July 2016, 32 new cases of AFM have been confirmed across the USA in 2016 by CDC, a sharp rise compared with 2015, when just 7 cases had been confirmed by that month. The numbers have risen steadily since April 2016. In past years, most cases have occurred between August and December, with a peak in October.Among the many unanswered questions about the condition are what causes it, how best to treat it, and how long the paralysis lasts. Although most cases occur in children, AFM occasionally affects adults. The CDC official who leads the surveillance efforts said that confirmed numbers for August will not be available until the end of September 2016, but the number of reports she is receiving from doctors around the country continues to rise. ""CDC is looking at these trends very carefully,"" Manisha Patel said. ""We have sent out several health alerts to states to let them know we are seeing an increase in reporting and to encourage them to communicate with doctors to report these cases in a timely fashion.""The CDC began tracking AFM in 2014, when 121 cases were confirmed. That year, the CDC counted only children affected by the disease. Their average age was 7. Most had a fever or a respiratory illness a few days before developing paralysis. Many had to be placed on respirators. Although 85 percent of the children recovered partially, only 3 of them recovered fully.Health officials and physicians around the country said they are concerned that the rising number of cases through July 2016 could foretell a repeat of 2014. ""You hate to be an alarmist, but there's reason to have some concern,"" said Avindra Nath, chief of the Section of Infections of the Nervous System at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. ""What we don't know is where are these cases. Are they clustered? Do they all look alike? Getting more information on these cases would be helpful.""Beyond saying that confirmed cases have been reported in 17 states through July 2016, Patel declined to reveal which states have been involved. But conversations and emails with physicians around the country indicate that at least 4 cases have occurred in California and at least 3 in Massachusetts, and that others have been seen in Florida, Texas, Pennsylvania, and New York, as well as Virginia.""We are definitely hearing of cases from our colleagues across the country,"" said Teri Schreiner, a neurologist at the University of Colorado and Children's Hospital Colorado. ""It's a trend that's worrisome ... what I'm hearing from others seems to be coming at a tempo similar to what happened in 2014.""Jean-Baptiste Le Pichon of Children's Mercy Hospital in Kansas City, Missouri, said that doctors on a USA. email list for pediatric neurologists reported five new cases of AFM in just the past few days. ""There is definitely an explosion of cases,"" Le Pichon said.No treatment other than physical therapy has yet been shown to markedly improve outcomes, although some doctors have reported that treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), used to treat some other viral infectious diseases afflicting the nervous system, might help. It's also been suggested that Prozac could prove beneficial. The degree of paralysis in the 1st month has generally improved only slightly over the course of a year.""After about a year or so, what you've got is what you've got,"" said Max Wiznitzer, a pediatric neurologist at Case Western Reverse University in Cleveland.Most perplexing is what causes the disease. The 2014 outbreak of AFM occurred at the same time as a far larger outbreak of enterovirus D68 [EV-D68] across the USA. The vast majority of patients infected with the virus developed only a respiratory illness. Some physicians were convinced that EV-D68 was the cause, not only because both outbreaks occurred at the same time but also because of a study that identified a particular strain of EV-D68 in the airways of children with AFM. But officials at the CDC and some doctors, including Wiznitzer, insist that the cause remains unproved.So far in 2016, no similarly widespread outbreak of EV-D68 respiratory infections has been reported, although cases of it and other enteroviruses have been seen in some areas. On [Fri 16 Sep 2016], Le Pichon, in Kansas City, said, ""I just got confirmation that we have an epidemic of enterovirus breaking out here and at least a few cases [of enterovirus] have typed positive for EV-D68.""Carol Glaser, a pediatric infectious-disease specialist at Kaiser Permanente in Oakland, California, said: ""If the theory is right that it's caused by EV-D68, which some of us believe more than others, this would be the time of year we start seeing it. It's an enterovirus, and they tend to peak in late summer and early fall.""Because the CDC's surveillance of AFM is less than 2 years old, it remains unclear if some of 2016's apparent rise in confirmed cases is due simply to more doctors sending in case reports, Patel said. And Wiznitzer emphasized that with just 32 confirmed cases across the USA so far, AFM remains extremely rareGlaser, however, said she is convinced that the condition is new. She worked at the California Department of Public Health when, in 2012, some of the 1st reports of AFM anywhere in the country came in from physicians there. ""I was there for 15 years and talked to neurologists every single day,"" she said. ""It wasn't until the fall of 2012 when the 1st physician called in and wanted a test for polio on one of his patients. One of my colleagues in the office chuckled and said to me, 'We don't have polio in the USA.' But in the next 2 weeks, I got 2 very similar phone calls. We had never had a report like that. I do think there was something new going on. Fortunately, it's still rare.""If EV-D68 does somehow cause AFM, studying the virus may lead to prevention or treatment. One glimmer of good news came from Kenneth Tyler, Chair of Neurology at the University of Colorado School of Medicine. He and his colleagues have been conducting experiments to infect mice with EV-D68 and have them develop loss of muscle control like that seen in AFM. He says he has submitted a paper to a peer-reviewed medical journal describing his success in doing so. The goal, he said, is to use mice to study how EV-D68 causes harm to the spinal cord and muscles, and to test potential therapies, such as IVIG. ""It looks like we're seeing protection with IVIG in the mouse model,"" he said.[Byline: Dan Hurley]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The publication below from late 2015 summarizes the California experience with this illness. Certainly enterovirus D-68 has been suspected to be the etiology but more information is needed for formal confirmation. Ken Tyler's work mentioned above may help in firming up the association.Although quite uncommon at this point, AFM has the potential to produce an atmosphere reflected to some degree of the peak years of poliomyelitis virus infection in the 1950s. A picture of a polio care facility with multiple Drinker respirators (""iron lungs"") can be seen at <http://www.polioeradication.org/portals/0/Image/PolioPrevention/polio-prevention-02.jpg>.Ref: Van Haren K, Ayscue P, Waubant E, et al: Acute flaccid myelitis of unknown etiology in California, 2012-2015. JAMA. 2015; 314(24): 2663-71 ; <http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2478202>.Abstract--------ImportanceThere has been limited surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis in North America since the regional eradication of poliovirus. In 2012, the California Department of Public Health received several reports of acute flaccid paralysis cases of unknown etiology.ObjectiveTo quantify disease incidence and identify potential etiologies of acute flaccid paralysis cases with evidence of spinal motor neuron injury.Design, setting, and participantsCase series of acute flaccid paralysis in patients with radiological or neurophysiological findings suggestive of spinal motor neuron involvement reported to the California Department of Public Health with symptom onset between June 2012 and July 2015. Patients meeting diagnostic criteria for other acute flaccid paralysis etiologies were excluded. Cerebrospinal fluid, serum samples, nasopharyngeal swab specimens, and stool specimens were submitted to the state laboratory for infectious agent testing.Results59 cases were identified. Median age was 9 years (interquartile range [IQR], 4-14 years; 50 of the cases were younger than 21 years). Symptoms that preceded or were concurrent included respiratory or gastrointestinal illness (n‰Ûä=‰Ûä54), fever (n‰Ûä=‰Ûä47), and limb myalgia (n‰Ûä=‰Ûä41). 56 patients had T2 hyperintensity of spinal gray matter on magnetic resonance imaging and 43 patients had cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis. During the course of the initial hospitalization, 42 patients received intravenous steroids; 43, intravenous immunoglobulin; and 13, plasma exchange; or a combination of these treatments. Among 45 patients with follow-up data, 38 had persistent weakness at a median follow-up of 9 months (IQR, 3-12 months). 2 patients, both immunocompromised adults, died within 60 days of symptom onset. Enteroviruses were the most frequently detected pathogen in either nasopharynx swab specimens, stool specimens, serum samples (15 of 45 patients tested). No pathogens were isolated from the cerebrospinal fluid. The incidence of reported cases was significantly higher during a national enterovirus D68 outbreak occurring from August 2014 through January 2015 (0.16 cases per 100 000 person-years) compared with other monitoring periods (0.028 cases per 100 000 person-years; P‰Ûäless than .001).Conclusions and relevanceIn this series of patients identified in California from June 2012 through July 2015, clinical manifestations indicated a rare but distinct syndrome of acute flaccid paralysis with evidence of spinal motor neuron involvement. The etiology remains undetermined, most patients were children and young adults, and motor weakness was prolonged.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
