Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/monkeypox-outbreak-reported-in-mingala-central-african-republic-61554/>During the past month, 14 monkeypox cases, including one fatality have been reported in 4 villages in the sub-prefecture of Mingala in [Basse-Kotto Prefecture, southern] Central African Republic (CAR).According to health officials, some patients are being treated at the health post Irra Banda, while others are referred to the District Alindao hospital. In addition, there are reports of 10 fatalities due to an unknown cause in the same villages.This is the 4th time monkeypox has been reported in CAR. Previously it was seen in Mbomou in 2001 and 2 years ago in Haute Kotto in addition to the outbreak in Mbomou between December 2015 and January 2016.Monkeypox is a relatively rare disease caused by the virus with the same name, which is found primarily in central and western Africa. It is closely related to the smallpox virus (variola), the virus used in the smallpox vaccine (vaccinia), and the cowpox virus.Infection with monkeypox is not as serious as its cousin, smallpox; however, human deaths have been attributed to monkeypox.According to the CDC, the symptoms of monkeypox are as follows: about 12 days after people are infected with the virus, they will get a fever, headache, muscle aches, and backache; their lymph nodes will swell; and they will feel tired. One to 3 days (or longer) after the fever starts, they will get a rash. This rash develops into raised bumps filled with fluid and often starts on the face and spreads, but it can start on other parts of the body too. The bumps go through several stages before they get crusty, scab over, and fall off. The illness usually lasts for 2 to 4 weeks.Rodents, such as rope squirrels, door mice, and pouched rats, are the suspected reservoir hosts, with monkeys and humans as secondary, spill-over hosts.People at risk for monkeypox are those who get bitten by an infected animal or if you have contact with the animal's rash, blood, or body fluids. It can also be transmitted person to person through respiratory or direct contact and contact with contaminated bedding or clothing.There is no specific treatment for monkeypox.[Byline: Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>viaProMED-EAFR from HealthMap Alerts<promed-eafr@promedmail.org>[This is the 2nd outbreak of monkeypox in the Central African Republic (CAR). The 1st outbreak actually started in December 2015 but was reported in early January 2016 (<http://afludiary.blogspot.com/2016/01/monkeypox-outbreak-reported-in-central.html>).Monkeypox has been reported in neighboring Cameroon and Democratic Republic of Congo. These 2 countries could be the source of infection for the Central African Republic or vice-versa. Hopefully the health authorities will get to the bottom of this outbreak and find a lasting solution to it. - Mod.YAMonkeypox cases are reported sporadically in the Central African Republic (CAR). This is the 2nd reported outbreak this year (2016). There have been human cases of monkeypox virus infection previously in the CAR. As noted in the comment in the previous ProMED-mail post (archive no. 20160119.3947756), Dr Mirdad Kazanji director of the Institut Pasteur at Bangui, reported that in June 2010, 2 boys aged 14 and 15 years were found to have diffuse maculopapular lesions associated with pustules and crusts (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20111129.3488). Dr Kazanji indicated that the phylogenetic tree showed that the 2010 virus strain was identical to the Democratic Republic of the Congo strain circulating in central Africa. This reported strain was identical to one associated with an outbreak of monkeypox in 2001 in a Bantu family living on the border between the CAR and the DRC, 480 km (about 300 mi) from the 2010 cases.It would be of interest to know to which clade the current monkeypox virus belongs, and which wild animals are the reservoirs in the Central African Republic. Given the human fatalities, one would assume that the monkeypox virus responsible in the current outbreak is the Central African one that occurs in the DR Congo.The previous comment mentioned that the USA's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and their cooperators have been conducting field and laboratory studies to determine which rodent species are reservoirs of the virus. The virus is seldom transmitted directly from one person to another, but there is a documented instance in the Republic of the Congo. Monkeys are not the reservoirs of the virus, despite the name that the virus has received. Although not determined, the main reservoirs of monkeypox are suspected to be rodents, including rope squirrels (_Funisciurus_ sp; an arboreal rodent), and terrestrial rodents in the genera _Cricetomys_ and _Graphiurus_.Maps of the Central African Republic can be seen at <http://www.africa.upenn.edu/CIA_Maps/Central_African_19865.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/55713>. - Mod.TY]
