One News Now, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]<http://www.onenewsnow.com/ap/united-states/southern-california-child-tests-positive-for-leprosy>A Southern California elementary school student has been found to have leprosy, public health officials said [Thu 22 Sep 2016], though they emphasize that the student's school and community remain safe.Two children from Indian Hills Elementary School in Jurupa Valley had initially been diagnosed by a local doctor with the condition known medically as Hansen's disease, Riverside County health officials said. But this week [week of 19 Sep 2016] they received results from the National Hansen's Disease Laboratory Research Program in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and they showed that only one of the children had tested positive.Public health officials emphasize that it is incredibly difficult to contract leprosy and that there is no danger to the child's classmates. The classrooms had been sanitized since the initial diagnoses. ""It is incredibly difficult to contract leprosy,"" said Dr Cameron Kaiser, Riverside County's public health officer. ""The school was safe before this case arose and it still is.""The US sees only about 150 leprosy cases occur each year, and over 95 percent of the population is naturally immune to it. Despite its reputation as an incredibly infectious plague that makes sufferers shed body parts, the disease can only be passed through prolonged contact, and is fairly easily treated with antibiotics. It is not spread through short-term contact like handshakes or even sexual intercourse.Those most at risk are family members who are in constant contact with an untreated person, and by travelers to places such as India, Brazil, and Angola where it's more common.Health and school officials will say nothing about how the child contracted the disease, or about the identity of either child who was tested.""The only way to protect the 2 students is for nobody to know who they are,"" district Superintendent Elliott Duchon told the Riverside Press-Enterprise. The school district sent an email to parents informing them of the diagnosis, and Duchon was at the school on Thursday afternoon to answer questions from concerned parents.Leprosy remains a problem in tropical hot spots of the world with some 250 000 new infections reported each year. Similar to tuberculosis, it can stay dormant for years before attacking the skin and nerves. The disease has long been misunderstood, with false stories of fingers and toes falling off adding to the stigma. Fear led some countries to quarantine people.Antibiotics typically kill the bacteria within days and make it non-contagious. It usually takes a year or 2 to fully clear the germ from the body. If left untreated, it can cause severe nerve damage, deformity and disability.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Leprosy in a child indicates that there is ongoing transmission from an active case of lepromatous leprosy, likely in the child's household. In states that border the Gulf of Mexico, where the nine-banded armadillo is mainly found, contact with _Mycobacterium leprae_-infected armadillos is another possible source, but there has been constant northward expansion of the armadillo population across the northern Mexican border, so armadillos in southern California are possible (<http://armadillo-online.org/expansion.html>).More information on this confirmed case of leprosy in Riverside County, California, would be appreciated from knowledgeable sources, as it becomes available.A discussion of leprosy can be found in my comments in the ProMED-mail leprosy posts listed below.The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1443>. Riverside County, with a population of almost 2.2 million residents, is located in southern California east of the Greater Los Angeles area to the Arizona border (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riverside_County,_California>). - Mod.ML]
