Bristol Post [edited]<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/popular-parks-in-bristol-test-positive-for-lead-after-it-has-been-banned-in-paint-for-decades/story-29750988-detail/story.html>Children's parks across Bristol [UK] have tested positive for high levels of lead, which has been banned in paint since 1992.An investigation by the BBC's ""One Show"" showed half of the 6 parks tested had a high metallic content on play equipment.Of the play areas tested Eastville, Dame Emily in Bedminster, and St Andrew's parks all contained high levels of lead. Eastville Park was also said to have a reading for mercury following the experiment.Lead based paints were banned in the UK in 1992 amid health concerns and parents are being warned to keep an extra eye on their children -- particularly if they are prone to putting things in their mouths.Bristol City Council said it would now be undertaking a review of play equipment and talking to its suppliers.Plymouth University's Dr Andrew Turner carried out the testing for the show which is due to be aired on BBC One at 7pm on 26 Sep 2016.He told BBC Radio Bristol: ""We were very surprised in that some of the parks we visited we thought they looked pretty modern and they should not be a problem and there was.""But I guess we are not surprised because of the research we have done previously in Devon and Cornwall has shown similar characters and patterns.""Dr Turner from the school of geography and environmental sciences said the mercury found in Eastville Park needed further investigation.He added he did not want to cause ""undue alarm"" but said parents of children who tend to put things in their mouths should keep their eyes out and make sure children washed their hands before eating.A spokesman for Bristol City Council said: ""We will be checking the issue with our play equipment suppliers and reviewing our current plans for our older play areas.""In one of the play areas tested, Eastville Park is one of the city's older play areas. Plans are already being considered to replace it.""In the meantime we would reassure the public and park users that the risk of harm to health is extremely low.""Good maintenance of parks helps to maintain the paint from flaking and therefore reduces potential exposure. However where paint is peeling there is a slightly higher risk to toddlers of getting in their hands and ingesting it.""Should parents be worried about the condition of any play equipment we would encourage them to wash their children's hands after use and make us aware of any issues.""[Byline: L. Churchill]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[One has to wonder, if lead has been banned since 1992, where was the paint sourced and did the playground equipment know of the lead in the paint? Does lead paint hold up to weathering better than non-lead paint?Children can lick playground equipment, or the paint may flake and children may consume the paint flecks. These scenarios make lead paint unacceptable in this arena.Lead poisoning occurs when lead builds up in the body, often over a period of months or years. Even small amounts of lead can cause serious health problems. Children under the age of 6 are especially vulnerable to lead poisoning, which can severely affect mental and physical development. At very high levels, lead poisoning can be fatal.Lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust in older buildings (playgrounds are unusual) are the most common sources of lead poisoning in children. Other sources include contaminated air, water, and soil. Adults who work with batteries, do home renovations or work in auto repair shops also may be exposed to lead.Initially, lead poisoning can be hard to detect -- even people who seem healthy can have high blood levels of lead. Signs and symptoms usually don't appear until dangerous amounts have accumulated.The signs and symptoms of lead poisoning in children may include:- Developmental delay- Learning difficulties- Irritability- Loss of appetite- Weight loss- Sluggishness and fatigue- Abdominal pain- Vomiting- Constipation- Hearing lossLead is a metal that occurs naturally in the earth's crust, but human activity -- mining, burning fossil fuels, and manufacturing -- has caused it to become more widespread. Lead was also once a key ingredient in paint and gasoline and is still used in batteries, solder, pipes, pottery, roofing materials, and some cosmetics.The use of lead-based paints for homes, children's toys and household furniture has been banned in the United States since 1978. But lead-based paint is still on walls and woodwork in many older homes and apartments. Most lead poisoning in children results from eating lead-based paint chips.Lead pipes, brass plumbing fixtures and copper pipes soldered with lead can release lead particles into tap water. Although lead solder in food cans is banned in the United States, it's still used in some countries.Some cases of lead poisoning have been traced to the use of certain traditional medicines, including:- Greta or azarcon. This fine orange powder -- also known as coral calcium and sea coral -- is a Hispanic remedy taken for an upset stomach, constipation, diarrhea, and vomiting. It's also used to soothe teething babies.- Litargirio. Also known as litharge, this peach-colored powder is used as a deodorant, especially in the Dominican Republic.- Ba-baw-san. This Chinese herbal remedy is used to treat colic pain in babies.- Ghasard. A brown powder, it is used as a tonic in India.- Daw tway. A digestive aid used in Thailand, it contains high levels of lead and arsenic.Lead can also sometimes be found in:- Soil. Lead particles that settle on the soil from leaded gasoline or paint can last for years. Lead-contaminated soil is still a major problem around highways and in some urban settings. Soil close to walls of older houses may contain lead.- Water. Copper plumbing soldered with lead is a source of contamination of household drinking water.- Household dust. Household dust can contain lead from lead paint chips or from contaminated soil brought in from outside.- Pottery. Glazes found on some ceramics, china and porcelain can contain lead that may leach into food.- Toys. Lead is sometimes found in toys and other products produced abroad.- Traditional cosmetics. Kohl is a traditional cosmetic, often used as eyeliner. Testing of various samples of kohl has revealed high levels of lead.Exposure to even low levels of lead can cause damage over time, especially in children. The greatest risk is to brain development, where irreversible damage may occur. Higher levels can damage the kidneys and nervous system in both children and adults. Very high lead levels may cause seizures, unconsciousness and possibly death.Doctors usually use a simple blood test to detect lead poisoning. A small blood sample is taken from a finger prick or from a vein. Lead levels in the blood are measured in micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL). A level of 5 mcg/dL or higher indicates your child may have unsafe levels of lead in their blood and should have their blood tested periodically. If levels become too high -- generally 45 mcg/dL or higher -- your child should be treated.The 1st step in treating all degrees of lead poisoning is to remove the source of the contamination. In this case it is the playground equipment.For children and adults with relatively low lead levels, simply avoiding exposure to lead may be enough to reduce blood lead levels.For more-severe cases, your doctor may recommend:- Chelation therapy. In this treatment, you take a medication that binds with the lead so that it's excreted in your urine.- EDTA therapy. Doctors treat adults with lead levels greater than 45 mcg/dL of blood with one or more of three drugs, most commonly a chemical called ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). Depending on your lead level, you may need more than one treatment. In such severe cases, however, it may not be possible to reverse damage that has already occurred.Children may need chelation therapy at lower levels than adults do.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lead-poisoning/basics/definition/con-20035487>. - Mod.TGMaps of England can be seen at <http://gwydir.demon.co.uk/jo/maps/uktowns.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/3092>.- Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
