Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/guatemala-eliminates-river-blindness-4th-country-onchocerciasis-free-24984/The Pan American Health Organization reported [Mon 26 Sep 2016], following efforts that spanned more than 2 decades, Guatemala has become the 4th country in the Americas and the world to be declared free of onchocerciasis (river blindness), a disease that can cause blindness and disability and that primarily affects people living in poverty.The announcement was made today by Dr Carissa F Etienne, Director of the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), at the opening session of the 55th PAHO Directing Council [Washington, DC, 26-30 Sep 2016]. ""PAHO congratulates Guatemala on this important achievement for regional and global public health"", said Etienne.Guatemala joins Colombia, Ecuador, and Mexico, which achieved elimination between 2013 and 2015, following the commitment made by affected PAHO member countries in 1991 to interrupt transmission of onchocerciasis. The final step toward making the entire Region of the Americas free of the disease is to eliminate it from Amazonian indigenous communities living along the Brazil-Venezuela border.Onchocerciasis is a parasitic disease caused by a long, thin worm known as filaria. The disease is transmitted by the bite of infected black flies commonly known in Guatemala as ""canche"" flies, which breed in fast-flowing rivers and streams, especially in areas where the population is dependent on agriculture. Because of the environment in which the flies breed, the disease is also known as ""river blindness"".Guatemala's achievement-----------------------Of the 6 countries in the Americas where transmission was present in the 1990s, Guatemala had the greatest number (4) of foci of transmission and the greatest number of people at risk for onchocerciasis, accounting for about 41 percent of the 568 000 people at risk in the Americas. ""Elimination has been made possible by our country's strong commitment, the efforts of our health workers and volunteers, and the high level of participation and empowerment of affected communities"", said Minister of Health of Guatemala, Lucrecia Hernandez Mack. ""Health is a priority for all. So we will continue to work to eliminate other neglected infectious diseases affecting our most vulnerable population.""Guatemala's main strategy to achieve elimination involved periodic mass administration of the antiparasitic drug Mectizan (ivermectin), delivered twice a year for up to 12 years and calibrated to the weight and height of individual recipients. The country succeeded in covering at least 85 percent of the eligible population each time the treatment was offered.Support for these and other country efforts was provided by PAHO/WHO, the Carter Center's Onchocerciasis Elimination Program for the Americas (OEPA), and Merck's Mectizan Donation Program in the form of technical assistance, funding, and drugs for national programs to eliminate the disease.A Guatemalan physician and researcher, Dr Rodolfo Robles, also played an important role in combating this disease. In 1915, Robles determined the causal relationship between this parasitic infection and the blindness and other visual alterations it causes, after this had been described in Africa. In his honor, onchocerciasis is known in Guatemala as ""Robles disease"".--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED-mail congratulates Guatemala for this significant achievement. Guatemala is the 2nd country in Central America to eradicate onchocerciasis following Mexico in 2015. - Mod.EPA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/13>.]
