Food Safety News [edited]<http://www.foodsafetynews.com/2016/09/scallop-related-hepatitis-a-outbreak-continues-to-expand/#.V-0mzfCLTIU>A total of 8 more people have been confirmed as victims in a hepatitis A outbreak in Hawaii as health officials continue to ask for help from the public, health care providers and foodservice workers to stem the spread of the virus. The outbreak, traced to frozen scallops imported from the Philippines and served raw at Genki Sushi restaurants on Oahu and Kauai, has sickened 284 adults. Onset dates of their illnesses range from 12 Jun 2016 through 16 Sep 2016.As of Wed [28 Sep 2016] weekly update from the Hawaii Department of Health, 71 of the victims have had symptoms so severe that they required hospitalization. Although the state health department identified the scallops as the likely source of the outbreak on 15 Aug 2016, closing the implicated Genki Sushi restaurants and embargoing the scallops, it is likely that new outbreak victims will continue to be identified.Unvaccinated people can contract hepatitis A from [close, usually household] contact with infected people. Contact activities are detailed on the Hawaii health department web page dedicated to the outbreak updates. Another transmission route can be infected foodservice workers who can be contagious well before they begin to develop symptoms. State and federal health officials consistently report it can take up to 50 days after exposure for hepatitis A symptoms to develop.As of Wed [28 Sep 2016], Hawaii health officials had not reported any cases in the ongoing outbreak being transmitted via foodservice workers. However, the state is maintaining a rolling list of restaurants and other foodservice settings - such as commercial airlines - that have had 1 or more employees confirmed as outbreak victims.Almost all people who get hepatitis A recover completely and do not have any lasting liver damage, although they may feel sick for months. Hepatitis A can sometimes cause liver failure and death, although this is rare and occurs more commonly in persons 50 years of age or older and persons with other liver diseases, such as hepatitis B or C.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[If it is assumed that no further HAV-contaminated scallops or cross-contaminated other foods remained after 15 Aug 2016, it is then quite likely that continuing reports of newly diagnosed acute hepatitis A infection are indeed for 2ary household or foodhandler spread causing a 2nd ""wave"" or at least a skew of late cases.Although HAV infection does have a short viremic phase and blood or blood product transmission has been reported, the peak time for infectivity based on virus in the stool is before symptoms begin. Although it may end prior to symptoms, after becoming ill, individuals are generally considered infectious for 2 weeks.Recently, Stanley Lemon's group at the University of North Carolina reported their newly described mouse model for HAV infection produced by the discovery that HAV evades the MAVS (Mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein) mediated type I interferon response. By producing mice that lack the receptor or both types I and II interferon, the mice became highly permissive for HAV mimicking the infection in humans. In this model, they demonstrated that the innate immune system's response to HAV infection causing inflammation and hepatocyte apoptosis caused liver injury, a new paradigm for viral pathogenesis in the liver.The publication is in press as Hirai-Yuki A, Hensley L, McGivern DR, et al: MAVS-dependent host species range and pathogenicity of human hepatitis A virus. Science 2016 10.1126/science.aaf8325, abstract available at <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6307/1541>. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/214>.]
