Daily Mail [edited]<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3814150/30-children-covered-mysterious-rash-California-elementary-school.html>At least 30 children at an elementary school in California's affluent Orange County have come down with a mysterious rash -- and no one knows why. An outbreak of bites and blisters at Lake Forest Elementary School has left children itching through the night, and worried parents searching for answers.Ten staff members at the school have also come down with the rashes and 5 new cases in the Saddleback Valley Unified School District have since been reported. The outbreak is reportedly appearing as rashes, bites and welts, on anywhere from faces to arms, feet, backs, chests and waistlines, according to parents. Mosquitoes, fleas, spiders, mites and mice have all been ruled out as the source, said Jared Dever of the Orange County Mosquito and Vector Control. Dever said bed bugs are also unlikely the cause, as they are noticeable and tend to strike when people are asleep or immobile, he told NBC Los Angeles. Dozens of traps have been laid out in the last week and Dever said they are now looking for a 'wide variety of biting or stinging insects'. But for now they still aren't any closer to finding the cause of the outbreak.'At this time, we have not been able to collect anything that would give us a clue as to what caused these bites,' Dever told CBS Los Angeles. The school's entire campus, including inside classrooms and outside on its 2 fields, was sprayed with pesticide last weekend.But new cases have continued to appear and thus the school will be sprayed again this weekend (1 and 2 Oct 2016) out of 'an extreme abundance of caution', said District Superintendent Assistant Tammy Blakely. Lake Forest Elementary closed its fields last Friday, 23 Sep 2016, after discovering all 10 staff members affected in the outbreak were involved with the after-school program. The program is held in a portable building next to one of the school's fields, which have since been reopened. Staff members have continued to keep the students off the fields this week out of caution, but children are still coming home with new bites.One mother said her affected 5th-grade son was not exposed to the school's fields and is not involved in the after-school program. The mother found 2 new bites on him Tuesday, 27 Sep 2016, a week after he came home with a rash on his arm.[Byline: Anneta Konstantinides]--Communicated by:Paige Deckerconcerned citizen[ProMED would like more information regarding this outbreak in Southern California and thanks Paige Decker for the posting.A similar rash was seen in cluster form related to toxic hairs (setae) from an oak caterpillar and the rash can be seen at: <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3570648/Invasion-KILLER-CATERPILLARS-Plague-toxic-oak-moths-hit-UK-wildlife-experts-urging-people-report-nests-soon-spot-them.html>.Maier and colleagues describe an airborne outbreak with urticarial rashes with the citation and abstract as follows: Maier H, Spiegel W, Kinaciyan T, et al: The oak processionary caterpillar as the cause of an epidemic airborne disease: survey and analysis.Br J Dermatol. 2003;149:990-997.Background: _Thaumetopoea processionea_ L. (order Lepidoptera), the oak processionary moth, is found in oak forests in most European countries. Its 3rd to 6th larval instars are armed with poisonous hairs (setae) containing an urticating toxin (thaumetopoein) potentially harmful to humans. Because _T. processionea_ infests trees at the edges of forests or standing alone, people frequently come into contact with its setae. In the woodland bordering on the western suburbs of Vienna conditions favoring its increase have led to frequent outbreaks of lepidopterism.Objectives: To determine the incidence of lepidopterism in a suburban environment with 3 separate caterpillar-infested oak trees and to ascertain the frequency of the various symptoms of lepidopterism and the manner of contact with setae.Methods: We conducted a telephone survey of all the households/institutions located within 500 m of the infested trees. To gain more information on patients' symptoms and on situations likely to lead to increased contact with setae we asked those who reported cutaneous reactions to complete a questionnaire. As part of the environmental study we described the outbreak site, examined patients and, with tape-strip samples taken from the surface of the soil, looked for setae persisting in the environment.Results: Of 1025 people surveyed 57 (5.6 percent) reported one or more symptoms of lepidopterism: 55 (96 percent) reported pruritus, 54 (95 percent) dermatitis, 8 (14 percent) conjunctivitis, 8 (14 percent) pharyngitis and 2 (4 percent) respiratory distress. The questionnaire was returned by 37 (69 percent) of the individuals with dermatitis. Of those, 16 percent had reacted with weal formation, 49 percent with papular rash and 22 percent with toxic irritant dermatitis. In 13 percent of respondents it was not possible to define the reaction. The risk factor analysis showed that airborne contamination was the most important cause: 97 percent of people had frequently passed an infested tree, 57 percent lived near a tree (in a neighboring garden) and 32 percent had a tree in their own garden. Direct contact with larvae was of minor importance (38 percent). In 4 of the tape-strip samples intact setae were identified 1 year after the infestation.Conclusions: Lepidopterism caused by _T. processionea_ is a public health problem of increasing significance. In years with outbreaks of the pest it can reach epidemic proportions in communities located near infested trees. Contact with airborne setae was mainly responsible for the occurrence of the disease.Additionally the CDC reported an outbreak of lepidopterism was reported in Florida (MMWR 2012;61:209-211). The discussion is reproduced below:The 2011 clusters of caterpillar- and cocoon-associated dermatitis follow the pattern of similar outbreaks at child care facilities that were investigated in Hillsborough County in the spring of 2004 and 2005 (1). The association between caterpillars and rash became apparent in 2005, when HCHD observed that 3 child care facilities had reported rash outbreaks during April of successive years. Attack rates for rash among children at the 3 facilities ranged from 12.6 percent to 21.7 percent. The affected children did not experience an immediate reaction, but rather a self-limiting pruritic, papular rash with distribution on the abdomen, chest, back, arms, or legs. Physical contact with the caterpillars was reported by almost all of the children experiencing a rash illness. Area physicians variously diagnosed the children as suffering from varicella, scabies, flea bites, mosquito bites, scarlet fever, fifth disease, contact dermatitis, or nonspecific viral rash. As a result of these misdiagnoses, the children often were treated inappropriately and excluded from child care unnecessarily. An entomologist for the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services identified the caterpillar associated with the 2005 rash outbreak as the white-marked tussock moth larva/caterpillar (_Orgyia leucostigma_). He reported that this caterpillar can cause contact dermatitis and that it previously had been linked to rash outbreaks in the state. The scientific literature clearly documents the ability of tussock moth caterpillars to cause rashes after physical contact. These include accounts of 7 persons who developed rashes after handling the white-marked tussock moth caterpillar in Minnesota in 1921 (_O. leucostigma_) (2). In 2000, the Douglas-fir tussock moth caterpillar (_Orgyia pseudotsugata_) was the cause of rash illnesses in Boy Scouts at a summer camp in New Mexico (3).The pathologic mechanism of caterpillar-associated rash is not understood entirely and depends on the caterpillar species. The mechanism is thought to involve exposure to chemicals on caterpillar or cocoon hairs (spicules) or mechanical irritation (4). Contact with hairs on the body and cocoon of the white-marked tussock moth caterpillars appears to cause skin irritation. Additionally, when caterpillars and cocoons are in high density, particularly susceptible persons can develop a rash when the hairs become airborne. In these situations, the rash might not occur on the area of the skin where caterpillar or cocoon contact occurred; several children at the Florida facilities had rash on the abdomen and back. Several other types of stinging caterpillars are common in Florida, including the io moth caterpillar (_Automeris io_), the saddleback caterpillar (_Sibine stimulea_), and the puss caterpillar (_Megalopyge opercularis_) (5). Contact with these caterpillars often will cause a more severe sting for which the pain will be apparent immediately to the victim. In contrast, the white-marked tussock moth produces delayed, minor irritation (2). Time from exposure to onset of rash is likely minutes to hours, similar to the onset time reported after exposure to other species of tussock moths. Treatment recommendations include placing adhesive tape over the affected area and repeatedly stripping the tape off to help remove the tiny hairs, washing the area with soap and water, applying ice packs to reduce the stinging sensation, and applying a topical, low potency steroid cream (4). If the eyes are involved; the person has a history of hay fever, asthma, or allergies; or allergic reactions develop, a health-care provider should be contacted.In light of these outbreaks, exposure to caterpillars and their cocoons should be considered when investigating rash illness outbreaks of unknown etiology during times of the year when the insect larvae are common. Factors that raise suspicion of a caterpillar-cocoon-associated outbreak, especially among children, include 1) mild pruritic rash on the abdomen, chest, back, arms, or legs that is not accompanied by fever; 2) pruritic rash outbreaks that have varied physician diagnoses; and 3) most importantly, the presence of caterpillars and cocoons known to cause pruritic rash combined with the opportunity for exposure. References----------1. Cruse K, Atrubin D, Loyless T. Rash illness outbreaks at daycare facilities associated with the tussock moth caterpillar, April 2004 and April 2005. Florida J Environ Health 2007;195:14-7.2. Knight HH. Observations on the poisonous nature of the white-marked tussock moth. J Parisitology 1922;8:133-5.3. Redd JT, Vorhees RE, Torok TJ. Outbreak of lepidopterism at a Boy Scout camp. J Am Acad Dermatol 2007;56:952-5.4. Goodard J. Physician's guide to arthropods of medical importance. 5th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2007:57-9.5. Heppner JB. Urticating caterpillars in Florida: 1 io moth, Automeris io (Lepidoptera: Saturniidea). Entomology circular no. 362. Gainesville, FL: Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services; 1994. Available at <http://www.floridaforestservice.com/forest_management/fh_publications.html#insects>The Douglas-fir tussock moth (_O. pseudotsugata_) is found in the US West and aerosolization of the toxic hairs from the caterpillars may be the cause here. Additional references:Hossler EW: Caterpillars and moths. Pt I Dermatologic manifestations of encounters with Lepidoptera. J Am Acad Dermatol 2010;62:1-10.Hossler EW: Caterpillars and moths. Pt II. Dermatologic manifestations of encounters with Lepidotera. J Am Acad Dermatol 2010;62:13-28.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1174>.]
