Euro Surveill. 2016;21(38):pii=30347. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.38.30347 [edited]<http://eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=22588>Maurer-Stroh S, Mak T, Ng Y, Phuah S, Huber RG, Marzinek JK, Holdbrook DA, Lee RT, Cui L, Lin RT. South-east Asian Zika virus strain linked to cluster of cases in Singapore, August 2016. SummaryZika virus (ZIKV) is an ongoing global public health emergency with 70 countries and territories reporting evidence of ZIKV transmission since 2015. On 27 Aug 2016, Singapore reported its 1st case of local ZIKV transmission and identified an ongoing cluster. Here, we report the genome sequences of ZIKV strains from 2 cases and find through phylogenetic analysis that these strains form an earlier branch distinct from the recent large outbreak in the Americas.Conclusions from sequence and structure analysisAt least within the Asian lineage the antigenic protein E surface is highly conserved and homogeneous with, from 2007 onwards, typical identities from 99.4 percent to 100 percent (or 3 to zero mutations) relative to the consensus of recent strains from Brazil. Moreover all of the E proteins in this lineage contain the typical N-glycosylation site (N444 in polyprotein numbering which is N154 in the E protein). The lack of surface mutation drift over the past 50 years (99 percent identity between Malaysia 1966 and consensus of Brazil 2015) also suggests that immune pressure on the E protein has not been a dominant factor in the Asian lineages' virus fitness and evolution so far. While the highly similar surface E proteins of the different strains in the Asian lineage should facilitate global vaccine development it is too early to judge if the strain linked to the Singapore outbreak would show any different disease characteristics from the one in French Polynesia and the Americas. Further studies are necessary and underway in Singapore to collect more data.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[It is interesting that the Zika virus circulating in Singapore is not the same as that currently circulating in the Americas. One wonders where in Asia it came from, and leads one to speculate that Zika virus is circulating in Asia at low levels and is often undetected or mistaken for dengue cases. - Mod.TY]******[3] CDC travel advisory, AsiaDate: Thu 29 Sep 2016Source: CDC [edited]<https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/zika-virus-southeast-asia>Zika Virus in Southeast Asia----------------------------What is the current situation?Travelers have returned from certain areas of Southeast Asia with Zika virus infection. While our understanding of the complications of Zika virus infection continues to evolve, and pending broader international surveillance efforts for Zika virus infection, we are providing pregnant women and their partners updated recommendations on reducing their risk for travel related Zika virus infection. CDC recommends pregnant women should consider postponing nonessential travel to Southeast Asia countries with reports of Zika virus infection from local transmission or related to travel to those countries, and those countries with adjacent borders where limited information is available to fully evaluate risk of Zika virus infection. Zika virus has been present in areas of Southeast Asia for many years, and several countries have reported occasional cases or small outbreaks of Zika virus infections. Zika virus is considered endemic in some countries, and a large number of local residents are likely to be immune. However, US travelers to endemic areas may not be immune to Zika virus and infections have occurred among travelers to Southeast Asia. Recent variations have been observed in the number of cases reported in Southeast Asia. This can reflect changes in awareness of Zika virus, surveillance and testing for Zika virus, or changes in intensity of Zika virus transmission. Pregnant women traveling to Southeast Asia could become infected with Zika virus. The level of this risk is unknown and likely lower than in areas where Zika virus is newly introduced and spreading widely.Countries included in this travel message include those listed below. For country-specific information, please visit Health Information for Travelers for individual countries:BruneiBurma (Myanmar)CambodiaIndonesiaLaosMalaysiaMaldivesPhilippinesThailandTimor-Leste (East Timor)VietnamTravel Considerations for Pregnant Women Traveling to Southeast AsiaZika virus infection during pregnancy causes severe birth defects, including microcephaly and severe fetal brain abnormalities. Therefore, pregnant women should talk with their healthcare provider and consider postponing nonessential travel to Southeast Asia. Zika virus testing should be offered to pregnant women and considered for other people who have symptoms of Zika virus disease if they have recently traveled to Southeast Asia.What can travelers do to prevent Zika?There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika virus infection. Travelers can protect themselves by preventing mosquito bites:- Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.- Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), or IR3535. Always use as directed.- Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.- Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)- Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.- Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.- Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.- Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.- Zika virus can be passed through sex from a person who has Zika virus to his or her sex partners. The use of condoms during sex (vaginal, anal, and oral) or abstaining from sex while traveling to these areas and after returning from these areas is recommended to avoid getting or passing Zika virus infection.After travel:Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person's blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. Even if they do not feel sick, travelers returning to the United States from countries where Zika virus is endemic should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks so that they do not spread Zika virus to uninfected mosquitoes.Travelers returning from countries where Zika virus is endemic and who have a pregnant partner should either use condoms or not have sex for the rest of the pregnancy.For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission [<http://www.cdc.gov/zika/transmission/sexual-transmission.html>].If you feel sick and think you may have Zika virus:- Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.- Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.- Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.If you are pregnant:Talk to a doctor or other healthcare provider after your trip, even if you don't feel sick. Pregnant women who have symptoms and have traveled to these countries should be offered testing for Zika virus infection. Pregnant women who have symptoms and who have had a possible sexual exposure during pregnancy to a partner who traveled to these countries should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.- If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.Clinician InformationZika virus during pregnancy causes severe birth defects, including microcephaly and severe fetal brain abnormalities. All pregnant women should be evaluated for possible Zika virus exposure and signs or symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease at each prenatal care visit.Possible exposures include- Travel to an area where there is epidemic or endemic Zika virus transmission- Sex with a partner who has traveled to or lived in an area with epidemic or endemic Zika virus transmissionThe recommendations for testing vary according to whether exposure occurred in an area where Zika virus has been newly introduced and is spreading widely or in an area with endemic Zika virus transmission. Dengue and Japanese encephalitis viruses circulate widely in Southeast Asia and might cause false positive results in blood tests. Because of this and related testing factors, routine serologic testing of asymptomatic pregnant women who have traveled to areas of Southeast Asia without epidemic Zika virus transmission is not recommended. For more information, please visit the Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Pregnant Women webpage [<http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/pregnant-woman.html>].Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants & Children is also available [<http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/infants-children.html>].--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[This advisory is applicable to travelers of any nationality going to the countries listed above. In a report released 30 Sep 2016 (Petersen EE, Meaney-Delman D, Neblett-Fanfair R, et al. Update: Interim Guidance for Preconception Counseling and Prevention of Sexual Transmission of Zika Virus for Persons with Possible Zika Virus Exposure -- United States, September 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ePub: 30 September 2016. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6539e1 and at the URL <https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6539e1.htm?s_cid=mm6539e1_e>) stating, ""CDC now recommends that all men with possible Zika virus exposure who are considering attempting conception with their partner, regardless of symptom status, wait to conceive until at least 6 months after symptom onset (if symptomatic) or last possible Zika virus exposure (if asymptomatic). Recommendations for women planning to conceive remain unchanged: women with possible Zika virus exposure are recommended to wait to conceive until at least 8 weeks after symptom onset (if symptomatic) or last possible Zika virus exposure (if asymptomatic). Couples with possible Zika virus exposure, who are not pregnant and do not plan to become pregnant, who want to minimize their risk for sexual transmission of Zika virus should use a condom or abstain from sex for the same periods for men and women described above. Women of reproductive age who have had or anticipate future Zika virus exposure who do not want to become pregnant should use the most effective contraceptive method that can be used correctly and consistently."" - Mod.TY]******[4] Contact transmission, USADate: Wed 28 Sep 2016Source: New England Journal of Medicine DOI: 10.1056/NEJMc1610613 [edited]<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc1610613#t=article>Sankar Swaminathan, M.D., Robert Schlaberg, M.D., M.P.H., Julia Lewis, D.O., Kimberly E. Hanson, M.D., M.H.S., Marc R. Couturier, Ph.D.. Fatal Zika Virus Infection with Secondary Nonsexual Transmission. Epidemic transmission of Zika virus (ZIKV) has rapidly occurred in the Americas, with most cases limited to mild or asymptomatic disease. To date, 9 deaths from ZIKV infection that were unrelated to the Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome have been confirmed in adults. Here, we report a rapidly progressive, fatal ZIKV infection acquired outside the United States and secondary local transmission in the absence of known risk factors for ZIKV infection.Patient 1, a 73-year-old man who had emigrated to the United States from Mexico in 2003, was admitted to a hospital in Salt Lake City [Utah] with hypotension and abdominal pain. Radiation therapy for stage IIB prostate cancer had been completed 1 month earlier, and he was receiving antiandrogen therapy but was otherwise not systemically immunocompromised. 8 days before admission, he had returned from a 3-week trip to the southwest coast of Mexico, where ZIKV transmission had been reported. He was well during his trip but reported being bitten by mosquitoes. After returning home, he reported having abdominal pain, pharyngitis, and fever, which was followed by conjunctivitis, nonbloody diarrhea, and myalgias.On the day of admission, hypotension and dyspnea had developed. The patient was alert and oriented with no fever but with tachypnea and tachycardia. He remained hypotensive after the administration of intravenous fluids, and vasopressors and broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated. The physical examination was remarkable for marked erythematous conjunctivitis with profuse tearing and soft-palate petechiae, tachypnea, and moderate, diffuse abdominal pain with mild guarding. A tourniquet test (which is often performed in patients in whom dengue is suspected) was negative.Laboratory testing revealed metabolic acidosis, an elevated venous lactate level, renal insufficiency, mild hypoglycemia, elevated aminotransferase levels, leukocytosis with 44 percent band forms, anemia, and marked thrombocytopenia. (Details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this letter at NEJM.org.) Testing for malaria and blood cultures were negative. A presumptive diagnosis of dengue shock syndrome was made. The patient's clinical deterioration progressed, with progressive respiratory and renal failure, metabolic acidosis, and hepatitis. On day 4 of hospitalization, the patient died shortly after care was withdrawn.Testing was negative for dengue virus (DENV) on polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) assay. Serologic analysis for DENV was consistent with remote infection, with a highly elevated IgG level and an equivocal IgM level. Serum testing for ZIKV on real-time PCR assay was positive, with a threshold cycle of 17 and a very high estimated viral load of 2.0 x 10^8 ZIKV genome copies per milliliter. High-throughput sequencing of RNA revealed the presence of a ZIKV strain that shared 99.8 percent of the genome sequence with a strain isolated from a mosquito in Chiapas, Mexico, in 2016. No other putative pathogen was detected by routine diagnostic testing and RNA sequencing.5 days after Patient 1 died, Patient 2, a previously healthy 38-year-old man with no known coexisting illnesses who had visited Patient 1 in the hospital, reported having conjunctivitis, fevers, myalgia, and facial maculopapular rash. The rash became generalized but resolved within 7 days. On day 7 after the onset of symptoms, urinalysis was positive for ZIKV but serum was negative on PCR assay. Serum IgM antibody to ZIKV was positive. Patient 2 reported having assisted a nurse in repositioning Patient 1 in bed without using gloves. Patient 2 also reported having wiped Patient 1's eyes during the hospitalization but reported having had no other overt contact with blood or other body fluids, including splashes or mucous membrane exposure. No health care workers who had contact with Patient 1 reported having symptomatic illness.It is likely that Patient 2 acquired the infection from Patient 1, since Patient 2 had not traveled to an area in which ZIKV is endemic in more than 9 months and had not had sex with a partner who had traveled to such areas. Given the very high level of viremia in Patient 1, infectious levels of virus may have been present in sweat or tears, both of which Patient 2 contacted without gloves. Transmission of the infection through a mosquito bite appears to be unlikely, since _Aedes_ species that are known to transmit ZIKV have not been detected in the Salt Lake City area. In addition, the 2nd case occurred 7 to 10 days after contact with the index patient in the hospital, which implicates direct contact during hospitalization.These 2 cases illustrate several important points. The spectrum of those at risk for fulminant ZIKV infection may be broader than previously recognized, and those who are not severely immunocompromised or chronically ill may nevertheless be at risk for fatal infection. The effect of previous infection with related flaviviruses cannot be assessed and may increase the risk of severe ZIKV infection. The transmission of flaviviruses through intact skin or mucous membranes, although uncommon, has been shown in experimental animal models and in at least one human case. Whether contact with highly infectious body fluids from patients with severe ZIKV infection poses an increased risk of transmission is an important question that requires further research.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[Zika virus shedding in tears has been demonstrated previously. Given Patient 1's high viremia, it seems entirely possible that this is the route of exposure of patient 2, who attended patient 1 without gloves. Perhaps patient 2 touched his eyes or mouth with virus contaminated hands or had a cut. This report establishes with 1st fatal case of Zika virus infection in the USA. It also is the 1st case of transmission by non-sexual direct contact. - Mod.TY]******[5] Zika virus infections in children, USADate: Fri 30 Sep 2016Source: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ePub: 30 September 2016. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6539e2 [edited] <https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6539e2.htm?s_cid=mm6539e2_e>Goodman AB, Dziuban EJ, Powell K, et al. Characteristics of Children Aged Less Than 18 Years with Zika Virus Disease Acquired Postnatally -- U.S. States, January 2015-July 2016.Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome and other neurologic complications can occur in adults after Zika virus infection. However, there are few published reports describing postnatally acquired Zika virus disease among children. During January 2015-July 2016, a total of 158 cases of confirmed or probable postnatally acquired Zika virus disease among children aged less than 18 years were reported to CDC from U.S. states. The median age was 14 years (range = 1 month-17 years), and 88 (56 percent) were female. 2 (1 percent) patients were hospitalized; none developed Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome, and none died. All reported cases were travel-associated. Overall, 129 (82 percent) children had rash, 87 (55 percent) had fever, 45 (29 percent) had conjunctivitis, and 44 (28 percent) had arthralgia. 5 (3 percent) patients were pregnant, all of whom were aged 16-17 years. No children were reported to have meningitis, encephalitis, or Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome. Health care providers should consider a diagnosis of Zika virus disease in children who have an epidemiologic risk factor and clinically compatible illness, and should report cases to their state or local health department.The symptoms most frequently reported among children with Zika virus disease are common to many childhood illnesses. Health care providers should consider Zika virus disease in the differential diagnosis for children with the acute onset of fever, rash, arthralgia, or conjunctivitis, who reside in or have a history of travel to an area where active Zika virus transmission is occurring, or who have another epidemiologic risk factor for Zika virus disease. Children with suspected Zika virus disease should have blood and urine specimens collected and tested per current guidelines. Although Zika virus disease appears to be a mild illness in children, health care providers should report suspected cases to their state or local health department to facilitate diagnosis and mitigate the risk for local transmission. Providers should counsel sexually active adolescents who might be exposed to Zika virus regarding the risk for congenital Zika virus infection and prevention of unintended pregnancies. Guidance for health care providers caring for infants and children with possible postnatally acquired Zika virus disease is available online (<http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/infants-children.html>).--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[More details are available in this report that can be accessed at the above URL. - Mod.TY]******[6] Diagnostic testDate: Mon 26 Sep 2016Source: Reuters [edited]<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-vela-diagnostics-fda-idUSKCN11W1BO>Vela Diagnostics said its test for the Zika virus had received ""emergency use authorization"" from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration [FDA].The test, already approved in Europe, is validated for plasma, serum and urine samples, the Singapore-based company said on Monday [26 Sep 2016].The FDA issues such emergency use authorization during public health emergencies, to quickly deploy unapproved medical products for as long as they are needed. The regulator last month [August 2016] issued a similar authorization for a Zika diagnostics test from Swiss drugmaker Roche.Zika, which was detected in Brazil, has spread to the Americas and is associated with microcephaly, a birth defect characterized by an unusually small head and potential developmental problems. In adults, it has been linked to Guillain-Barr̩ syndrome, a temporary paralysis.The disease has since spread to parts of Southeast Asia. [The virus was already present in Southeast Asia. - Mod.TY][Reporting by Akankshita Mukhopadhyay and Natalie Grover in Bengaluru; editing by Sriraj Kalluvila]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There is an internal controversy within the CDC about which diagnostic test is best (<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-health/wp/2016/09/27/cdc-whistleblower-claims-agency-has-been-using-wrong-zika-test/>). Because Zika, dengue and chikungunya virus infections are clinically similar in many cases, having a rapid and sensitive diagnostic test that can differentiate them is important, especially for pregnant women at risk of teratogenic effects of their fetuses. - Mod.TY]******[7] Fetal skull formationDate: Thu 29 Sep 2016Source: Reuters [edited]<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-zika-skull-idUSKCN11Z2CN>The Zika virus causing an epidemic in Brazil and spreading through the Americas can infect and alter cells in the human nervous system that are crucial for formation of bones and cartilage in the skull, a study found on Thursday [29 Sep 2016].The research, published in the journal Cell Host & Microbe, may help explain why children born to mothers who have had the virus can have smaller-than-average skulls and disproportionate facial features.Zika has already been shown to attack foetal brain cells known as neural progenitor cells -- a type of stem cell that gives rise to various kinds of brain cells.The death of these cells is what disrupts brain development and leads to microcephaly, the severe birth defect seen in babies whose mothers were infected with Zika during pregnancy.American scientists who conducted this latest study by infecting human cells with Zika in the lab, found the virus can infect another type of cell known as cranial neural crest cells -- which give rise to skull bones and cartilage -- and cause them to secrete signaling molecules that alter their function.In the lab, the increased levels of these molecules were enough to induce premature differentiation, migration, and death of human neural progenitor cells, the researchers said.""In addition to direct effects of Zika virus on neural progenitors and their derivatives, this virus could affect brain development indirectly, through a signaling cross-talk between embryonic cell types,"" says Joanna Wysocka, a chemical and systems biologist at the Stanford University School of Medicine who co-led the study.She added that neural crest cells may be just one example, and that the same mechanism may also be relevant to other tissues that come in contact with a foetus' developing brain during head formation and could be infected by Zika.The Zika virus has spread to almost 60 countries and territories since the current outbreak was identified last year in Brazil, raising alarm over its ability to cause microcephaly as well as other neurological disorders in infants and adults. Brazil has been the country hardest hit so far, with more than 1800 reported cases of microcephaly.Wysoka's team cautioned that their work did not provide direct proof that Zika virus infects cranial neural crest cells in live animals or humans. Follow-up research would also be needed to look for any evidence that the virus' effect on these cells would be enough to cause microcephaly, they said.[Byline: Kate Kelland; editing by Alison Williams)--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[This research adds anther piece to the puzzle of underlying mechanisms of teratogenic effects of Zika virus infections. - Mod.TY]
