Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/diphtheria-reappears-in-venezuela-after-long-absence-another-symptom-of-a-broken-health-system-15395/>The governor of Bolivar state, Venezuela, Francisco Rangel GÌ mez, confirmed this week that there are 13 cases of diphtheria in the town of San Antonio, Sifontes municipality, according to a report from El Diario de Guayana (computer translated).The Venezuelan Society of Public Health says diphtheria was eradicated in Venezuela in the late 1940s. Officials state they have the vaccines and medicines to prevent and combat the outbreak.Bolivar state is also the region in Venezuela most affected by the current malaria epidemic, the largest in 75 years.Diphtheria is a dangerous respiratory disease caused by a potent toxin produced by certain strains of the bacterium _Corynebacterium diphtheriae_. Diphtheria is extremely contagious through coughing or sneezing. Risk factors include crowding, poor hygiene, and lack of immunization.Symptoms usually appear within a week of infection. This infection is characterized by a sore throat, coughing and fever very similar to many common diseases like strep throat. Additional symptoms may be bloody, watery discharge from the nose and rapid breathing. However, a presumptive diagnosis can be made by observing a characteristic thick grayish patch (membrane) found in the throat. In more severe cases, neck swelling and airway obstruction may be observed. In the tropics, cutaneous and wound diphtheria is much more common and can be a source of transmission.The real serious danger is when the toxin that is produced by the bacterium gets into the bloodstream and spreads to organs like the heart and nervous system. Myocarditis, congestive heart failure and neurological illnesses of paralysis that mimic Guillain-Barre syndrome are most severe. Even with treatment, fatalities are still seen in up to 10% of cases.Diphtheria can be treated and cured successfully with antitoxin and antibiotics if started early enough. The prevention of diphtheria is through vaccination.[Byline: by Robert Herriman]--Communicated by:Kathryn Soderholm <kathryn.soderholm@gmail.com>[The following is extracted from moderator LL's comments in a prior ProMED-mail post Diphtheria - Pakistan: (PB) fatalities 20151208.3845800:""Certainly, the lack of diphtheria anti-toxin [may be] an issue here for the treatment of individuals who have developed diphtheria. Primary protection against deaths from this toxin-mediated disease is, however, vaccination with toxoid to prevent the disease itself.""Most complications of diphtheria, including death, are attributable to effects of the toxin. The severity of the disease and complications are generally related to the extent of local disease. The toxin, when absorbed, affects organs and tissues distant from the site of invasion. The most frequent complications of diphtheria are myocarditis and neuritis. Myocarditis may present as abnormal cardiac rhythms and can occur early in the course of the illness or weeks later, and can lead to heart failure. If myocarditis occurs early, it is often fatal. Neuritis most often affects motor nerves and usually resolves completely. Paralysis of the soft palate is most frequent during the 3rd week of illness. Paralysis of eye muscles, limbs, and diaphragm can occur after the 5th week. Secondary pneumonia and respiratory failure may result from diaphragmatic paralysis. Other complications include otitis media and respiratory insufficiency due to airway obstruction, especially in infants.""The following is extracted in part from my moderator comments in ProMED-mail post Diphtheria - India: (Haryana) fatal, suspected 20120908.1285940:""Diphtheria is a vaccine-preventable disease. Diphtheria toxoid vaccine is not manufactured as a monovalent vaccine; it is available combined with tetanus toxoid, both in full-strength doses (denoted by upper case letters ""DT"") in pediatric formulations and in reduced-strength dose combined with full-strength dose of tetanus toxoid (denoted by upper case T and lower case d, ""Td"") in adult formulations. These are combined with acellular or whole-cell pertussis antigens in full strength in pediatric formulations (DTaP, DTwP) or in reduced strength in the adolescent/adult-formulations (Tdap).""In the United States, a total of 5 DTaP doses are recommended to be given to children, one dose each at ages 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, with booster doses at ages 15-18 months, and 4-6 years (<http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/downloads/child/0-18yrs-child-combined-schedule.pdf>). The fully immunized person who is exposed can become a carrier of the bacterium but may only develop a mild case, or may not get sick at all. But if not fully vaccinated, the risk of getting severely ill is 30 times higher (<http://www.vaccinews.net/diseases_vaccines.php>).""A further discussion of diphtheria can be found in moderator ML's comments in ProMED post Diphtheria - Norway ex Mozambique: cutaneous, traveler 20140621.2556752.BolÌ var State, located in north-central Venezuela, with a population of about 1.4 million, is one of the 23 Venezuelan states (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bol%C3%ADvar_(state)>). - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/29>.]
