13 Action News [edited]<http://www.ktnv.com/news/national/the-cdc-says-this-poliolike-disease-is-rare-but-on-the-rise>Cases of a rare polio-like illness have shot up in recent months. The CDC recorded 32 cases of acute flaccid myelitis across 17 states in the 1st half of this year [2016]. The illness has been most often observed in children. It can cause limb weakness, loss of muscle tone and, in extreme cases, respiratory failure.Of the follow-up cases the CDC has observed, 85 percent of those afflicted with AFM show improved symptoms. But only 3 patients ever fully recovered from the disease. The median age of affected patients is 7 years old.For comparison, the CDC only recorded 21 cases of AFM through all of last year [2015]. Two cases of AFM were recorded in July 2015; in July 2016, that number jumped to 12.A CDC official told The Washington Post: ""We have sent out several health alerts to states to let them know we are seeing an increase in reporting and to encourage them to communicate with doctors to report these cases in a timely fashion.""Of course, this year [2016] still pales in comparison to the last 6 months of 2014, which saw 120 confirmed AFM cases. That's when the CDC 1st started paying attention to the disease.The exact cause of AFM is still unknown, but researchers noted that the 2014 surge in cases coincided with a national enterovirus outbreak.Since not much is known about the condition, the CDC doesn't have a specific treatment to recommend. But it does recommend children practice basic hygiene and stay up to date on their vaccines in order to avoid diseases associated with AFM.[Byline: Matt Picht, Lauren Stephenson]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[AFM is one of a number of conditions that can result in neurologic illness with limb weakness. Such illnesses can result from a variety of causes, including viral infections, environmental toxins, genetic disorders, and Guillain-Barre syndrome, a neurologic disorder caused by an abnormal immune response that attacks the body's nerves. Oftentimes, however, despite extensive laboratory testing, a cause for AFM is unable to be identified.The viruses that have been associated with AFM include enteroviruses (polio and non-polio), West Nile virus (WNV) and viruses in the same family as WNV, specifically Japanese encephalitis virus and Saint Louis encephalitis virus, herpesviruses, such as cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus, and adenoviruses.In an Investigation of Acute Flaccid Myelitis in U.S. Children, August 2014-December 2014, CDC, results indicated:- The median age of the children was about 7 years.- Almost all of them were hospitalized; some were put on ventilators (breathing machines).- Most patients had fever and/or respiratory illness before onset of neurologic symptoms.- 80 percent of the children had elevated white blood cell counts, often with elevated protein levels, in their spinal fluid.- Half of the children had follow-up information (median period of observation: 4 months) available after their illness; about 85% reported some improvement in symptoms, while 15% showed no improvement. Only 3 of the children have fully recovered.- CDC tested many different specimens from these patients for a wide range of pathogens that can result in this syndrome.- Despite extensive testing, no pathogen was consistently detected in the patients' spinal fluid; a pathogen detected in the patients' spinal fluid would be good evidence to indicate cause of the illness.A total of 32 people have been confirmed as AFM cases from January through July 2016(<http://www.cdc.gov/acute-flaccid-myelitis/afm-surveillance.html>).A HealthMap of the US can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>. - Mod.LK]******[2] Canada: enterovirus D68Date: Fri 30 Sep 2016Source: The Globe and the Mail [edited]<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/polio-like-virus-resurfaces-in-canada-after-one-year-hiatus/article32157635/>At least 2 unexplained cases of sudden, partial paralysis in young children have been confirmed in Canada, and doctors believe the cases could be linked to the return of a virus that in 2014 sent hundreds of North American children to hospital with severe respiratory illness.The 2 children who turned up in hospital with polio-like symptoms -- one in British Columbia, the other in Alberta -- both tested positive this month [September 2016] for enterovirus D68, a relative of the common cold that was rarely identified in Canada and the United States before a high-profile outbreak 2 years ago.""We're interested in this virus because it has some fairly unique features,"" said Danuta Skowronski, the lead epidemiologist for influenza and emerging respiratory pathogens at the B.C. Centre for Disease Control (BCCDC). ""Most enteroviruses will just cause mild or no symptoms, and that's likely for D68 as well. But it has been found in association with severe respiratory symptoms, particularly in people with asthma, and also with some neurological complications.""EV-D68 disappeared in 2015, but this year [2016] it's back, giving epidemiologists like Dr. Skowronski the opportunity to better understand what link, if any, there is between this enterovirus strain and the sudden onset of paralysis in children.The Public Health Agency of Canada sent out a bulletin late last week warning that EV-D68 has re-emerged this year [2016] and that physicians ought to be on the lookout for it.So far, British Columbia has confirmed 16 cases of EV-D68, Alberta has confirmed one, and Ontario has identified at least 32. None of the Ontario patients has displayed paralysis or muscle weakness.EV-D68 is almost certainly present elsewhere in the country. In the vast majority of cases, the virus causes only mild cold-like symptoms, meaning patients do not visit their doctors or hospitals where they might be flagged for testing.""It's the tip of the iceberg,"" said Bryna Warshawsky, a public health physician with Public Health Ontario. ""These numbers are ... just a tiny piece of the picture.""As well, there is no formal requirement that cases be tracked and reported, as there is with some other communicable diseases in Canada. Until the 2014 outbreak, there was little point in determining the exact strain of a non-polio enterovirus because there is no vaccine or anti-retroviral treatment to combat such viruses.Now, though, epidemiologists are following EV-D68 more closely in hopes of unravelling its connection to the paralysis cases. ""It's hard to advance in your understanding when there aren't additional cases to be able to clarify or investigate,"" Dr. Skowronski said. ""I think [EV-D68] likely does play a role, but what kind of role?""During the 2014 EV-D68 outbreak, 5 people in B.C. who tested positive for the virus also developed partial paralysis. The BCCDC checked in on those cases one year later and found none had regained full mobility. Three of the patients had been on ventilators at the hospital at some point.One, a child under the age of 5 with no underlying health problems, arrived at the hospital unable to lift his or her head, and wound up spending more than 6 months in the hospital.This year [2016], B.C. has found one case of a child under the age of 2 with partial arm paralysis. The Alberta case, which was described in detail on ProMED, where doctors around the world can report infectious disease updates, involved an otherwise healthy 2-year-old who arrived at the hospital with vomiting and paralysis in the right side of the face that eventually progressed to ""flaccid paralysis"" of the right arm and weakness in the left arm.Marek Smieja, the head of microbiology for the Hamilton Regional Laboratory Medicine Program, said his lab has so far confirmed 28 cases of EV-D68 from the 12 Southern Ontario hospitals it covers, far fewer than at this point in the 2014 outbreak.""Now, even if our numbers double, we'll be nowhere near the amount [from 2014],"" he said.[Byline: Kelly Grant]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is one of more than 100 non-polio enteroviruses. This virus was 1st identified in California in 1962.The following background information on EV-D68 can be found on the CDC website at <http://www.cdc.gov/non-polio-enterovirus/about/ev-d68.html>:""How common is EV-D68 in the United States?----------------------------------------Small numbers of EV-D68 have been reported regularly to CDC since 1987. However, during 2014 the number of people reported with confirmed EV-D68 infection was much greater than that reported in previous years. We can't predict whether EV-D68 will be a common type of enterovirus detected this year or in future seasons. That's because a mix of enteroviruses circulates every year, and different types of enteroviruses can be common in different years.CDC is aware of limited sporadic EV-D68 detections in the U.S. in 2016. There is no indication of unusual activity. Enteroviruses are ever-present in the community, and each year we expect to detect cases. As in previous years, CDC will continue to work in 2016 with states by testing specimens to determine virus type, supporting the identification and investigation of outbreaks, and monitoring seasonal activity.What happened with EV-D68 in 2015?---------------------U.S. laboratories reported zero EV-D68 detections to CDC's National Enterovirus Surveillance System (NESS) during the 2015 enterovirus season (summer and fall). Also, CDC received about 700 specimens for enterovirus testing during 2015; 0 were positive for EV-D68, many were positive for a rhinovirus type.What happened with EV-D68 in 2014?--------------------------------In summer and fall 2014, the United States experienced a nationwide outbreak of EV-D68 associated with severe respiratory illness. From mid-August 2014 to 15 Jan 2015, CDC or state public health laboratories confirmed a total of 1153 people in 49 states and the District of Columbia with respiratory illness caused by EV-D68. Almost all of the confirmed cases were among children, many whom had asthma or a history of wheezing. Additionally, there were likely many thousands of mild EV-D68 infections for which people did not seek medical treatment and/or get tested.CDC received about 2600 specimens for enterovirus testing during 2014, which was substantially more than usual. About 36% of those tested positive for EV-D68. About 33% tested positive for an enterovirus or rhinovirus other than EV-D68.EV-D68 was detected in specimens from 14 patients who died in the U.S. in 2014.""See ProMED-mail posting ""Acute flaccid myelitis - USA: human enterovirus D68 susp. 20160923.4509548"" for further discussion.A HealthMap of Canada can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/12>. - Mod.LK]
