Peacefmonline.com [edited]<http://peacefmonline.com/pages/local/health/201609/293422.phpBlood transfusion has been identified as a contributory factor to the spread of malaria in the country. Mrs. Regina Brobbey Appiaa, Malaria Control focal person at the Sunyani Municipal Hospital said this at an orientation workshop intended to form the District Malaria Advocacy Group (DMAG).The DMAG aims to help stop the disease through ownership and sustainable methods in the Sunyani Municipality. The day's programme jointly organised by the Sunyani Municipal Health Directorate and Hope for Future Generations, a health-centered non-governmental organisation (NGO) was on the theme: ""Contributing to reduce malaria incidence in Ghana"". It was attended by more than 30 participants including health workers, heads of department, representatives of NGOs and civil society organisations, traditional rulers, the media and the public.The DMAG, under a project dubbed: ""Advocacy for Resource for Malaria Stoppage (ARMS) Initiative in Ghana"" is being funded by the Department for International Development (DFID)/United Kingdom Agency for International Development (UKaid). It will be responsible for the improvement and participation of leadership at the Municipal level in malaria programming and implementation and to support in the prevention and treatment capacity of health workers, NGOs and community members"". The overall goal of the project is to contribute to reducing incidence of malaria in the Sunyani Municipality through testing prior to malaria treatment, formation and operationalisation of DMAG in the Municipality"".Mrs. Appiaa said malaria could accidentally be transmitted through blood transfusion and advised that the product should be properly screened before transfusion is administered. She said malaria remains the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the country in spite of the implementation of numerous malaria awareness programmes by stakeholders.Mrs. Appiaa said the Sunyani Municipal Hospital from January to June 2016 recorded 21 percent of Malaria cases among the top 10 Out-Patient Department (OPD) cases. She observed that the biggest challenge in the treatment of malaria cases was medical practitioners relying on their clinical judgment in managing the disease. She urged the public to insist on testing at the chemical shops, clinics and hospitals before accepting treatment. Madam Rose A. Baalaboore, the Regional Coordinator of Hope for Future Generations said funding for the national effort in the prevention of malaria continued to dwindle because Ghana had attained middle income status, but all its malaria control activities were donor-funded.Madam Baalaboore said it is time to increase domestic funding for malarial control activities by involving stakeholders in mobilising support for logistics and kits like Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets to reduce drastically the occurrence of the disease. She said the project is being piloted in Sunyani and Techiman South Municipalities, Sunyani West, Techiman North, Asutifi South and Dormaa East Districts. She said besides increase of local government funding for malaria prevention, it would promote sharing of information on current developments in malaria control among leaders and community members and would also increase its diagnosis before treatment.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Prevention of blood transfusion transmission of malaria in Sub-Saharan Africa is difficult (Nansseu JR, Noubiap JJ, Ndoula ST, Zeh AF, Monamele CG. What is the best strategy for the prevention of transfusion-transmitted malaria in sub-Saharan African countries where malaria is endemic? Malar J. 2013;12:465. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-465).Transmission may occur at low parasite densities from asymptomatic donors. Rapid diagnostic tests may identify _P. falciparum_ and _P. vivax_ down to 200 parasites per microliter blood, but the performance for _P. ovale_, _P. malariae_ and _P. knowlesi_ is unknown. Microscopy may identify parasites down to 2.5 parasites per microliter and PCR down to 0.002 parasites per microliter.The best option is probably to administer a treatment dose of an Artemisinin-based combination to all patients receiving blood transfusion in hyperendemic areas. - Mod.EP]
