EurekAlert! [edited]<https://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2016-10/indl-fpo100316.php>For the 1st time, researchers have found proof of a direct association between strain OC43 of the human coronavirus (HCoV) and neurological disease in humans. This major breakthrough was made by British and Quebec researchers, including Professor Pierre Talbot of the INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier Centre, who was the 1st not only to demonstrate the virus's ability to invade the human central nervous system, but also to suggest the neuropathological effects of this virus responsible for approximately 20 percent of common colds and more severe respiratory conditions in certain vulnerable individuals. The discovery was recently featured in [a letter to] the New England Journal of Medicine, one of the world's most prestigious scientific journals.The researchers studied the case of a very young patient who died from encephalitis. The patient had presented severe immunodeficiency and received a stem cell transplant. Although most cases of encephalitis are caused by viruses or bacteria, it can be particularly difficult to pinpoint the cause in immunodeficient patients. As the case study shows, it was impossible to identify the pathogen using conventional techniques.The researchers used various methods that allowed them to irrefutably identify the presence of strain OC43 of the human coronavirus in the young patient's brain tissue. ""Among the methods used, deep sequencing of biopsy materials provides an important tool for the diagnosis of unexplained encephalitis, particularly in immunodeficient patients who have undergone stem cell transplantation,"" said Professor Talbot. This breakthrough is significant because it will make it possible to use specific treatments that are better tailored to patient conditions.The results obtained confirm Professor Talbot's hypothesis that the human respiratory coronavirus can cause certain neurological diseases of unknown origin, such as multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and encephalitis.Citation: Morfopoulou S, Brown JR, Davies EG et al. Human Coronavirus OC43 Associated with Fatal Encephalitis. N Engl J Med. 2016; 375(5):497-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1509458, PMID: 27518687.<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc1509458#t=article>--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[HCoV infections can be associated with respiratory and extrarespiratory manifestations, including central nervous system involvement. The clinical and genetic characteristics of circulating HCoVs in the pediatric population should be monitored to detect the spread of particularly virulent HCoV strains in the community at an early stage and, if required, to facilitate the development of adequate preventive and therapeutic measures.An association of acute neural disease with HCoV infection has been clearly demonstrated by the detection of HCoV-OC43 in the cerebrospinal fluid of a child presumed to have acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, and the frequent association between HCoV-HKU1 infection and the development of febrile seizures seems to lead to the same conclusion. Lau et al. studied 10 children infected by this virus and found that half were affected by febrile seizures, the highest prevalence among all the HCoVs (20). Because the fever in all of these children was not particularly high and lasted for a shorter period than fever associated with other viral respiratory infections, it was considered unlikely that all were simple febrile seizures, but possible that they may represent specific neurologic damage induced by HCoV-HKU1 or that the virus may trigger a negative immune response.Excerpted and edited from Principi N, Bosis S and Esposito S. Effects of coronavirus infections in children. Emerg Infect Dis. 2010;16(2):183-8. doi: 10.3201/eid1602.090469, PMID: 20113545.<https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/16/2/09-0469_article>. - Mod.LK]
