BioRxIv [edited]<http://www.biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2016/10/04/078923.full.pdf>Julien Rioua, Chiara Polettoa, Pierre-Yves BoÌÇlle. A comparative analysis of Chikungunya and Zika transmission.----------------------------------------------AbstractThe recent global dissemination of chikungunya and Zika [viruses] has fostered public health concern worldwide. To better understand the drivers of transmission of these 2 arboviral diseases, we propose a joint analysis of chikungunya and Zika epidemics in the same territories, taking into account the common epidemiologic features of the epidemics: transmitted by the same vector, in the same environments, and observed by the same surveillance systems. We analyse 18 outbreaks in French Polynesia and the French West Indies using a hierarchical time-dependent SIR model accounting for the effect of virus, location and weather on transmission, and based on a disease specific serial interval. We show that chikungunya and Zika have similar transmission potential in the same territories (transmissibility ratio between Zika and chikungunya of 1.04 [95 percent credible interval: 0.97; 1.13]), but that detection and reporting rates were different (around 20 percent for Zika and 40 percent for chikungunya). Temperature variations between 22 C and 29 C [71-84 F] did not alter transmission, but increased precipitations showed a dual effect, 1st reducing transmission after a 2-week delay, then increasing it around 5 weeks later. The present study provides valuable information for risk assessment and introduces a modelling framework for the comparative analysis of arboviral infections that can be extended to other viruses and territories.Discussion [summarized]Understanding the drivers of transmission and the sources of variability in the different patterns of propagation requires investigating the effects of viruses and environmental variables, but is complicated by differences in surveillance systems. The hierarchical model here developed combined epidemiological data on the chikungunya and Zika outbreaks in 9 different territories, making optimal use of the available information and allowing for disentangling the role of different components on transmission, thus providing a better understanding of the arboviral dynamics.Transmission was adequately described with additive contributions of island and virus effects, compared to the less structured free model. Then, once the effects of the locality and the weather conditions were taken into account, the difference in transmission between the 2 viruses was minute, with a relative transmissibility of 1.04 [95 percent CI: 0.97; 1.13] in favour of Zika. This suggests that the epidemic dynamics are controlled less by the difference between viruses than by factors related to the locality such as mosquito abundance, the local environmental, socio-economic and meteorological conditions. Similar transmissibility is also compatible with reproduction ratio estimates reported for both diseases.2nd, we quantified the role of precipitation and temperature in driving transmission for the 2 diseases, by modelling their effect on transmissibility. We found that precipitation, but not temperature, influenced the epidemics in French Polynesia and French West Indies. The effect of increased rainfall was 2-fold, reducing transmission 2 weeks later but enhancing it with a time lag of 4-6 weeks. These effects were the same when the lagged terms were introduced one at a time rather than simultaneously in the model, and persisted irrespective of the inclusion of temperature. In the present analysis, we found that the inclusion of precipitation improved the fit of the epidemics of Zika in Tahiti and chikungunya in Sous-le-vent Islands, while other outbreaks were less affected by the inclusion of this ingredient. The short term negative association between increased rainfall and transmission is less commonly reported. It may be due to a reduced exposure to mosquitoes either because adult mosquitos are more likely to die or because the human population would reduce outdoor activity and be protected by indoor mechanisms (e.g. air-conditioning) [54].A 3rd finding was the dissimilarity in the reporting ratios between the 2 diseases and between islands. We estimated that overall only 20 percent of all Zika cases ended up being reported, against 40 percent of chikungunya cases. These estimates are consistent with the much higher asymptomatic rate of ZIKV infections (around 80 percent) compared to CHIKV infections (around 30 percent) reported in serological studies in Yap Island and French Polynesia. Differences between territories may be ascribed to the organization of the local surveillance systems in relation with the structure of the target population, where a major difficulty is the assessment of the actual population covered. The operational characteristics of surveillance networks in these islands are unknown, however increased medical participation is often possible in the less populated islands and may contribute to larger reporting rates estimated in the smaller territories of Austral Islands, Marquesas Islands, the Tuamotus, and Saint Martin.Our model presented some innovative features. Its hierarchical structure allowed for the epidemic assessment in several territories and for 2 diseases at the same time while keeping low the number of parameters (e.g. random island factors are drawn from a common distribution). By relying on other outbreaks occurring in the same area and on outbreaks in other areas, we obtained stable, precise posterior estimates for the reproductive ratios, the reporting rates and the attack rates of each epidemic.In conclusion, we jointly analysed epidemics of Zika and chikungunya in 9 island territories to quantify the respective roles of the virus, the territory and the weather conditions in the outbreak dynamics. We showed that chikungunya and Zika [viruses] have similar transmissibility when spreading in the same location. Accounting for the level of precipitation improved the modelling of the epidemic profiles, notably for the outbreaks of Zika in Tahiti and of chikungunya in the Sous-le-vent Islands. Eventually, different probabilities of developing symptoms for the 2 diseases translated in substantial differences in reporting rates. The present study provides valuable information for the assessment and projection of _Aedes_-borne infections spread, by quantifying the impact of virus, territory and weather in transmission. In addition, it introduces an approach that can be adopted in other comparative analyses involving multiple arboviruses and locations.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[It is helpful to understand both biological, social and climatic factors influencing arbovirus transmission for current outbreaks and for future prediction of the risk of new outbreaks. One hopes that the above model will be further tested for verification in other outbreaks of these 2 viruses as well as others. ProMED-mail subscribers interested in these types of models are urged to read the entire article to understand how the model was developed.Maps showing the location of French Polynesia can be accessed at: <http://www.ourpacific.co.nz/AdditionalFiles/images/Pacific%20Map.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/22997> and a map of the French West indies in the Caribbean at <http://www.worldatlas.com/webimage/countrys/namerica/caribb/fwindies.htm>. - Mod.TY]
