Daily Mail [edited]<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3819486/Father-three-29-struck-meningitis-two-weeks-bitten-false-widow-spider-rushed-E.html>A father of 3 was struck down with meningitis 2 weeks after suffering a devastating bite from a false widow spider.DG, 29, from Yateley in Hampshire, saw his foot double in size after the 5 cm-wide spider sank its fangs into his skin.The 29-year-old was rushed to A&E after he contracted a bacterial infection and flu-like symptoms from the venom.""I'm weak and exhausted, totally wiped out, all from a tiny nip from an innocent-looking spider."" DG added: ""My fear is that my children won't recognise the false widows as dangerous and will get bitten in our garden or home. I always told them not to be scared of spiders as they can't harm you, but I'm proof they can.""DG said he was standing in his kitchen on 2 Sep 2016 when he noticed a spider of ""around 5 cm diameter"" scuttling away from his bare left foot.He recalled: ""There was nothing interesting about the spider, only that it looked like a regular house spider, maybe a little larger. I didn't feel anything and thought nothing more of it. It was only the following day I noticed a red raised lump on my foot. It was itchy, and I assumed I'd been bitten by an insect.""DG was left in excruciating pain after the bite, with skin blistering and foot swelling. Over the next 2 days, the foot became swollen and red and he felt tired, feverish and weak. Five days after spotting the spider, he consulted his GP.DG said: ""My foot had swollen to double the size, and I couldn't fit my shoe on it. It was red and difficult to walk on. My GP said I must have been bitten by something and prescribed me with antibiotics.""The next day, unable to walk comfortably and with his left foot beginning to blister and leak pus, he went to A&E at Frimley Park Hospital in Surrey. He recalled: ""I suddenly remembered the spider at my home and it all made sense. I couldn't believe it. I was in agony and barely able to walk because of a tiny spider.""Tests revealed that he had suffered a skin infection called cellulitis from the bite; if left untreated, could have spread to his bones and caused permanent damage.""I've read about other unlucky people getting bitten by spiders in this country but assumed they'd be easy to spot and avoid, not that I could be in danger in my own kitchen."" He said: ""Luckily X-rays revealed they had caught it just in time. But I stayed in overnight so they could monitor me. I was discharged the following day and lay at home feeling lousy, unable to work and self-medicating with intravenous antibiotics twice a day. Over the next week, the swelling went down, and I was a bit more mobile. I thought I was getting better and hoped to put the whole thing behind me.""However, as he tried to get back to full fitness, he developed a fever and became light-sensitive and weak.DG spent time in hospital after becoming weak and developing a fever; he was later diagnosed with viral meningitis. He said: ""I struggled to get out of bed and felt totally disoriented. My wife drove me to hospital while I slumped in the car.""At hospital, he was given a [lumbar] puncture and examined for suspected bacterial meningitis, which can cause brain-damage and deafness, and can be life-threatening.He said: ""I heard the word meningitis, and I froze. Suddenly it wasn't just a reaction to a bite; my health was seriously at risk, all because of a house spider. I was proof that everything I'd said to my kids about spiders not being scary was false."" He added: ""The doctors told me it [the meningitis] wasn't life-threatening, but that wasn't much of a comfort. Medics told me my immune system went down as a result of the bite, which led to me contracting meningitis, but I was so weak, I barely took in what they were saying.DG said his foot swelled to ""twice its size"" after the bite from the spider, which has been commonly sighted in the UK this summer [2016]. He was prescribed antibiotics to combat the condition, and remained in hospital for observation. He later contracted stomach infection _C. diff_, which meant he was held in isolation for 4 days.""I just wanted to get better and be at home with the family, but instead I was laid up in isolation.""He was given the all-clear from both conditions and discharged and now is recovering his strength at home.DG will continue to take medication for 2 months and has been told he should not expect any long-term effects from the bite. He said: ""It's been a hellish few weeks, but I'm on the mend now after the trauma of a spider bite. I wouldn't say I developed a fear of spiders, but I'm certainly more wary of them. It's worrying that a little spider can take a grown man down; you don't expect it in this country. It's autumn now, so all the spiders will be heading inside to get warm, which means we might see a few more false widows in our home. I'll be keeping a close eye on my kids and researching ways to keep them out.""[Byline: Alex Matthews]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[False black widows come from the Canary Islands and were 1st found in Torquay, Devon in 1879, probably after being accidentally imported. They are now widespread in southern England. These spiders are currently on the move in many British homes and gardens, likely due to the relatively mild winter last year [2015] and the warm weather now.While the UK claims they do not have toxic spiders, this spider and people's experience may cause a rethinking of the toxicity of this spider. While they are less toxic than the black widow, their bite can be painful, although some people do not recall being bitten.False black widow spiders have a similar shape to widow spiders. Females are larger than males and measure up to 15 millimeters, while the males measure up to 10 millimeters. False black widow spiders have round, bulbous abdomens. The male's body is thinner and more elongate than the female's; however, the color pattern is similar. Not all _Steatoda_ species resemble widows; many have distinct coloring and are significantly smaller.Most false black widow spiders are a brownish color with pale markings. Apart from the color differences from the black widow spider (_Latrodectus_), false black widow spiders have teeth on their chelicerae (mouth parts found in arachnids, _Merostomata_ (horseshoe crabs) and _Pycnogonida_ (sea spiders).The bite itself from the false black widow spider is not usually felt; however, within a short space of time, a local burning sensation is followed by radiating pain. Within 20 minutes, the affected part will swell and develop a weal.If bitten on the hand, within 3-4 hours, swelling will develop and tingling will be felt. Two small puncture wounds in the region of the swelling will be surrounded by local abnormal redness of the skin with a small bluish tinge occurring a few hours later.However, bites by the false black widow spider generally do not have any long-lasting effects. The symptoms associated with the bite of several false black widow spider species are known in the medical profession as ""steatodism"" and have been described as a less severe form of latrodectism (the symptoms associated with a widow spider bite). Redback spider antivenin has been shown to be effective at treating bites from false black widow spiders, after it was mistakenly administered to a bite victim who was incorrectly believed to have been bitten by the far more dangerous redback spider.The false widow's cousin is the black widow. The false widow delivers a neurotoxic venom. These toxins interfere with the nervous system and can result in a range of symptoms from cramps to interfering with breathing.Fortunately, the poison of the false widow is nowhere near as potent as that of the black widow, which is credited with killing more people than any other spider. It is said that the venom of the black widow is around 50 times stronger than that of a rattle snake.Do:- The 1st step in treating a false widow spider bite is to wash the area with soap and water. This is to prevent infection, which will be infinitely worse than the bite.- To try and minimise swelling by using a cold compress (do not place ice directly on the skin as this may burn). A bag of frozen peas is ideal for this and should be applied to the bite for around 10 minutes.- Applying a bite spray or antiseptic cream will help prevent infection. Also, many creams have local anesthetics which will reduce discomfort and itching.- Some sources suggest administering antihistamines to counter any possible allergic reaction and anaphylactic shock.- The condition of the person should be monitored, and if it appears to worsen, a trip to A&E may be warranted.- It is always a good idea to try and catch the spider so medical staff know what they are dealing with. Obviously, make sure you don't get bitten again doing this!Don't:- Antibiotics should not be taken unless there is an infection (or definite risk of infection). They will not help.- Trying to suck or cut out the ""poison"" will not work and are more likely to result in the wound becoming infected.Frequency of bites from false black widow spiders have increased as the species spreads into the south and east of England.Portions of this comment were extracted from: <https://animalcorner.co.uk/animals/false-black-widow-spider/> and <http://www.falsewidowspider.org.uk/bites>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>.]
