European Medicines Agency [edited]<http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Report/2016/09/WC500213035.pdf>DiscussionPlasma-Derived Medicinal ProductsThe virus safety of plasma-derived medicinal products is based on a combination of several safety measures, i.e. donor selection, testing and efficient virus inactivation/removal steps applied at manufacture, see EMA guideline on plasma-derived medicinal products. [These safety measures are discussed.]Urine-Derived Medicinal ProductsIt was noted that some manufacturers (i.e. for hormone preparations) collect their urine starting material from South America (Argentina). There is no regular health check at each donation of urine and given the high number of asymptomatic infections or persons with non-specific symptoms due to ZIKV [Zika virus]-infection, the possibility that ZIKV may enter the urine pools cannot be excluded. There is no published scientific information about the stability of infectious ZIKV in urine. Urine has been known as a route for excretion of viruses for a long time and manufacturers of urine-derived medicinal products have been requested to investigate their manufacturing process for virus inactivation/removal. When drafting the Guideline on the adventitious agent safety of urine-derived medicinal products (EMA/CHMP/BWP/126802/2012), the available data from 2011 provided assurance that there is efficient clearance of viruses, which may contaminate the urine pool, by defined steps in the manufacturing processes.ConclusionsPlasma-Derived Medicinal Products It is expected that the manufacturing process of plasma-derived medicinal products (including solvent-detergent treated plasma) efficiently inactivates or removes ZIKV. Therefore, no additional safety measures such as exclusion of plasma donors or NAT testing are considered necessary. Urine-Derived Medicinal Products ZIKV can be excreted in urine. Based on a product-specific risk assessment it was concluded that the manufacturing processes of urine-derived medicinal products have the potential to inactivate/remove ZIKV. Additional safety measures such as screening of urine donors or urine donations or the deferral of donors returning from affected areas are not considered necessary for these products as currently authorised in the EU. However, product-specific risk assessment should be updated on a regular basis since ZIKV is currently spreading to other areas. --Communicated by:Roland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>******[3] Zika/dengue virus co-infectionsDate: Thu 29 Sep 2016Source: Clin Infect Dis. (2016)bdoi: 10.1093/cid/ciw667 [edited]<http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2016/09/29/cid.ciw667.full.pdf+html>Nicole Iovine, John Lednicky, Kartikeya Cherabuddi, Hannah Crooke, Sarah K. White, Julia C. Loeb, Eleonora Cella, Massimo Ciccozzi, Marco Salemi, J. Glenn Morris, Jr.. Co-Infection with Zika and Dengue-2 Viruses in a Traveler Returning from Haiti, 2016: Clinical Presentation and Genetic Analysis.Abstract Zika virus [ZIKV] and dengue virus [DENV] serotype 2 were isolated from a patient with travel to Haiti who developed fever, rash, arthralgias and conjunctivitis. The infecting ZIKV was related to Venezuelan and Brazilian strains but evolved along a lineage originating from strains isolated in 2014 in the same region of Haiti.[Introduction]We report a case of dual DENV/ZIKV infection in a traveler to Haiti in 2016, describe the clinical presentation, and provide a phylogenetic analysis that highlights the potential role of the Haitian epidemic in the ongoing diversification and spread of ZIKV worldwide.DiscussionCo-infection of ZIKV and DENV has been described, as might be expected given that the _Aedes_ mosquito can serve as a vector for both. It has been reported that approximately 80 percent of ZIKV infections are asymptomatic, as are a comparable percentage of DENV infections. When symptomatic infection with either ZIKV or DENV does occur, the clinical manifestations are similar, although persons who do become ill with Zika virus usually have mild symptoms. Of note, the lower extremity joint swelling our patient had has been described as unique to infection cause by ZIKV compared to DENV. However, our patient with dual DENV/ZIKV infection had manifestations on the more severe end of the clinical spectrum than has been described for ZIKV infection alone, including severe arthralgias and joint swelling. While this may simply represent individual variation, it is recognized that DENV antibodies can enhance ZIKV infection, at least in an in vitro setting; the impact of co-infection of ZIKV and DENV on severity of illness in patients remains to be determined. RT-PCR-based testing for DENV and ZIKV allows for detection of dual infection if discriminatory primers are used. Our ability to detect both viruses from culture supernatants of infected cells using discriminatory primers followed by sequencing to verify the uniqueness of the viruses enabled us to establish dual infection in this patient. The phylogenetic findings are consistent with diversification of the virus in Haiti. The maximum-likelihood tree inferred from full genome sequences shows that ZIKV Haiti/1/2016 clusters within the Asian/South American lineage, but does not share an immediate common ancestor with ZIKV Haiti/1/2016. Overall, these phylogenetic analyses highlight the ongoing diversification and spread of ZIKV in the Americas, and Haiti in particular. In conclusion, the observed molecular epidemiologic patterns raise the possibility that continuous evolution and subsequent dissemination of different viral lineages in South America could eventually lead to the emergence of novel variants with distinct genomic features compared to the parent strains, which could include changes in virulence, transmissibility and pathogenesis. --Communicated by:Roland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[As the authors point out, more cases of dual ZIKV-DENV infections will have to be evaluated clinically to determine if their disease is more severe than usual for either virus infection alone. It seems very likely that there have been other cases of dual ZIKV-DENV infections. Both viruses have been circulating simultaneously over large geographic areas in the Americas. However, it would require that they be detected proactively, in a fairly sophisticated laboratory having both sets of primers for RT-PCR testing. - Mod.TY]******[4] Pacific Islands, WHODate: Fri 23 Sep 2016Source: WHO Outbreaks and Emergencies [edited]<http://www.wpro.who.int/outbreaks_emergencies/zika/WPR_Zika_RiskAssessment/en/>Zika Risk Assessment in the Western Pacific Region--------------------------------------------------On 1 Feb 2016, the Director-General of the World Health Organization declared that the cluster of microcephaly cases and other neurological disorders reported in Brazil, following a similar cluster in French Polynesia in 2014, constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) requiring a coordinated international response.The announcement followed an Expert Committee meeting called under the International Health Regulations (IHR).As of 22 Sep 2016, 72 countries and territories have reported evidence of vector-borne Zika virus transmission since 2007 and 21 have reported microcephaly and other central nervous system malformations potentially associated with Zika virus infection or suggestive of congenital infection. 19 countries have reported an increased incidence of Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome (GBS) and/or laboratory confirmation of a Zika virus infection among GBS cases.The Western Pacific Region is the 2nd most affected region after the Americas with 19 countries and areas reporting locally-acquired Zika cases since 2007. In 2016, locally-acquired Zika cases have been reported from 13 countries and areas in the region.The 1st large Zika virus outbreak was reported in the Western Pacific in April 2007 in Yap State of the Federated States of Micronesia. It was the 1st notification under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2015). That outbreak was not associated with any observed neonatal malformations or GBS.In French Polynesia following the Zika outbreak in 2013-14, 19 cases of neonatal malformations, including 8 cases of microcephaly were reported, along with 42 cases of GBS. This occurred simultaneously with an outbreak of dengue. The association with the reported neonatal malformations and GBS were only detected later through retrospectives studies. One case of microcephaly was also reported from the Republic of Marshall Islands in 2016.Zika cases continue to be reported and it is highly likely that locally-acquired or imported cases of Zika virus infection will occur in additional countries and areas within the region. This is due to the presence of the competent vector in the region, high volume of travel within and outside the region from affected areas and possibly large number of people without immunity. Singapore, Malaysia and the Philippines are the latest countries to report cases.On 1 Sep 2016, the WHO Director-General, upon the advice of the IHR Emergency Committee declared the continuation of the PHEIC. The Committee emphasized the need for a better scientific understanding of Zika virus epidemiology, clinical disease and prevention. The Committee also recommended for WHO to provide appropriate guidance on effective surveillance and management of Zika virus disease in countries with high vulnerability but low capacity.Risk assessments have been periodically conducted in the Western Pacific Region since the declaration of PHEIC. The results of the risk assessment guide the preparedness planning and response.Risk AssessmentBased on available information to date, it is highly likely that the Western Pacific Region will continue to report cases, and possibly new outbreaks of Zika virus infection. This is due to the wide distribution of the competent vector in the region, the high volume of travel to and from endemic and affected areas and some populations without immunity to the virus.Large-scale outbreaks increase the possibility of having babies born with microcephaly and/or other central nervous system (CNS) complications; and cases of Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome (GBS) triggered by Zika.Therefore, it is crucial that countries and areas in the Western Pacific Region have systems in place:- to promptly detect Zika cases and associated complications through strengthening existing surveillance systems;- to reduce adverse health outcomes associated with Zika virus infection through risk communication, community engagement and integrated vector management;- to provide care, services and support to individuals, families and communities affected by Zika; and- to contribute to filling knowledge gaps through supporting research in areas affected by Zika.This risk assessment is made based on available information to date. The results of the assessment may change as new information becomes available.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides an excellent overview of the Zika virus situation in the Pacific Islands. In the recent past, the virus has spread among islands due to inter-island movement of viremic individuals. This movement is certain to continue, bringing the risk of new cases in islands with susceptible populations. Continued surveillance of new cases throughout the Pacific Islands is necessary.A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the islands in the Pacific can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/380>. - Mod.TY]******[5] Sexual transmission from vasectomized manDate: October 2016Source: The Lancet Infectious Diseases DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30320-6 [edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(16)30320-6/fulltext>Marta Arsuaga, Silvia GarcÌ a Bujalance, Marta DÌ az-MenÌ©ndez, Ana VÌÁzquez, Jose R Arribas. Probable sexual transmission of Zika virus from a vasectomised man. SummaryWe report a case of probable sexual transmission of Zika virus from a vasectomised man. A couple (a man aged 53 years, who had a vasectomy in 2007, and a woman aged 51 years) travelled to Maldives on 5 Feb 2016, spending 7 days in a diving-boat and 3 days in a non-resort island (Nilandhoo, central province of Maldives), where they experienced mosquito bites. They returned to Madrid on 18 Feb 2016. The couple reported unprotected sexual intercourse on 28 Feb 2016.[Conclusion]Although the woman might have acquired Zika virus by mosquito bite, the incubation period if this is the case (18 days after returning from Maldives) would be exceptionally long, so sexual transmission from her partner is definitely a possibility. Sexual transmission of Zika virus infection from a vasectomised man has not previously been reported.To the best of our knowledge, our male patient has the most prolonged reported detection (69 days) of infectious Zika virus in semen. A previous report communicated persistence of Zika virus RNA in semen 62 days after onset of illness but culture results were not available. Because we were able to detect Zika virus in semen despite a vasectomy, a distal source for Zika virus such as prostate, seminal vesicles, proximal or distal bulbourethral glands, and pre-ejaculate secretions is possible. In our case, high loads of infectious virus particles were present 69 days after the onset of illness. Public health recommendations to prevent sexual transmission of Zika virus should take these data into consideration and extend duration of time recommended to use protection during intercourse after travelling to endemic area even if the man has had a vasectomy.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[This article reports long-term shedding of infectious virus in semen and adds an additional case to the numbers of male-to-female sexual transmission events. Zika virus genomic sequences has been detected by PCR in semen for as long as 188 days, but it is not certain that infectious virus particles were shed for that long a period of time. In any event, compliance with the WHO and CDC recommendations for not practicing unprotected sex is prudent. - Mod.TY]******[6] Virus shedding, monkeysDate: Mon 3 Oct 2016Source: Nature Medicine doi:10.1038/nm.4206 [edited]<http://www.nature.com/nm/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nm.4206.html>Christa E Osuna, So-Yon Lim, Claire Deleage, Bryan D Griffin, et al. Zika viral dynamics and shedding in rhesus and cynomolgus macaques.AbstractInfection with Zika virus has been associated with serious neurological complications and fetal abnormalities. However, the dynamics of viral infection, replication and shedding are poorly understood. Here we show that both rhesus and cynomolgus macaques are highly susceptible to infection by lineages of Zika virus that are closely related to, or are currently circulating in, the Americas. After subcutaneous viral inoculation, viral RNA was detected in blood plasma as early as 1 day after infection. Viral RNA was also detected in saliva, urine, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and semen, but transiently in vaginal secretions. Although viral RNA during primary infection was cleared from blood plasma and urine within 10 days, viral RNA was detectable in saliva and seminal fluids until the end of the study, 3 weeks after the resolution of viremia in the blood. The control of primary Zika virus infection in the blood was correlated with rapid innate and adaptive immune responses. We also identified Zika RNA in tissues, including the brain and male and female reproductive tissues, during early and late stages of infection. Re-infection of 6 animals 45 days after primary infection with a heterologous strain resulted in complete protection, which suggests that primary Zika virus infection elicits protective immunity. Early invasion of Zika virus into the nervous system of healthy animals and the extent and duration of shedding in saliva and semen underscore possible concern for additional neurologic complications and nonarthropod-mediated transmission in humans.DiscussionBy using our tractable model, we demonstrate -- at least in the nonhuman primates studied here -- rapid ZIKV replication and viral turnover rates that engender a limited productive half-life for infected cells. The major host cells sustaining ZIKV replication in vivo are of myeloid lineages found in the blood and tissues. It is formally possible that some portion of the ZIKV RNA positive neutrophils represent the phagocytosis of infected material or cells, although evidence from other flaviviruses seems to contradict this notion. The demonstration of rapid and high-level ZIKV infection of cerebellar neurons is concerning, and might help to explain the neurologic outcomes associated with ZIKV infection observed in adults and early gestational neonates. These findings might also warrant enhanced clinical vigilance in Zika-endemic areas for adults who present with neurologic symptoms. Notably, ZIKV RNA invasion of the CNS was detected in animals with the highest peak blood plasma viremia, which perhaps implies that at least the initial means of ZIKV seeding of the CNS might be passive spillover of virus from the periphery.Similar to the findings of Dudley et al., we demonstrate that rapid innate and adaptive immune responses limit viral replication in the blood and that these responses offer protection from future reinfection. Neither study has accounted for limiting numbers of target cells as a means of RNA reduction during acute infection. However, both studies clearly show that despite ZIKV-specific immunity, viral shedding continues unabated in anatomic tissues and fluids. Our data suggest that anatomic sites such as the male genital tract (MGT) and oral mucosa might harbor persistent reservoirs of ZIKV that, under certain conditions, could facilitate viral transmission over extended periods to uninfected hosts. Particularly, the sustained high-level production of infectious virus in the MGT, highlights the possibility of sexual transmission long after the resolution of symptomatic infection. Notably, we observed very high levels of ZIKV RNA in the uterus of infected animals but unexpectedly low levels in vaginal fluids. If these observations translate to ZIKV infection of humans, then it might indicate a reduced potential for female-to-male sexual transmission, despite posing substantial risk to pregnancy. However, in both male and female macaques, extended ZIKV shedding in the saliva implies that the oral mucosa can sustain viral replication over extended periods. The observation of persistent infectious shedding in oral fluids underscores a possible concern for transmission in household settings. Collectively, these findings further highlight the need for the rapid development of vaccines and therapeutics against ZIKV.ReferenceDudley, D.M. et al. A rhesus macaque model of Asian-lineage Zika virus infection. Nat. Commun. 7, 12204 (2016).--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[If, as the authors note, these results in non-human primates are applicable to humans, it may explain why just a single case of female-to-male sexual transmission has come to our attention, versus scores of male-to-female transmission cases. It would have been interesting to know if those individual monkeys with ZIKV in cerebellar neurons showed neurological signs or had lesions observable histologically. - Mod.TY]
