US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [edited]<http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm522932.htm>Risk of hepatitis B reactivating in some patients treated with direct-acting antivirals for hepatitis C--------------------------------------------------------------------------------The FDA is warning about the risk of hepatitis B virus (HBV) becoming an active infection again in any patient who has a current or previous infection with HBV and is treated with certain direct-acting antiviral (DAA) medicines for hepatitis C virus. In a few cases, HBV reactivation in patients treated with DAA medicines resulted in serious liver problems or death.As a result, we are requiring a Boxed Warning, our most prominent warning, about the risk of HBV reactivation to be added to the drug labels of these DAAs directing health care professionals to screen and monitor for HBV in all patients receiving DAA treatment. This warning will also be included in the patient information leaflet or Medication Guides for these medicines.Direct-acting antiviral medicines are used to treat chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, an infection that can last a lifetime. These medicines reduce the amount of HCV in the body by preventing HCV from multiplying, and in most cases, they cure HCV. Without treatment, HCV can lead to serious liver problems including cirrhosis, liver cancer, and death (see List of Direct-Acting Antivirals).Health care professionals should screen all patients for evidence of current or prior HBV infection before starting treatment with DAAs, and monitor patients using blood tests for HBV flare-ups or reactivation during treatment and post-treatment follow-up. It is currently unknown why the reactivation occurs.Patients should tell your health care professional if you have a history of hepatitis B infection or other liver problems before being treated for hepatitis C. Do not stop taking your DAA medicine without first talking to your health care professional. Stopping treatment early could result in your virus becoming less responsive to certain hepatitis C medicines. Read the patient information leaflet or Medication Guide that comes with each new prescription because the information may have changed. Contact your health care professional immediately if you develop fatigue, weakness, loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting, yellow eyes or skin, or light-colored stools, as these may be signs of serious liver problems.We identified 24 cases of HBV reactivation reported to FDA and from the published literature in HCV/HBV co-infected patients treated with DAAs during the 31 months from 22 Nov 2013 to 18 Jul 2016. This number includes only cases submitted to FDA, so there are likely additional cases about which we are unaware. Of the cases reported, 2 patients died and 1 required a liver transplant. HBV reactivation was not reported as an adverse event in the clinical trials submitted for the DAA approvals because patients with HBV co-infection were excluded from the trials. The trials excluded these patients in order to specifically evaluate the safety of DAAs, including their effects on the liver, in patients infected with only HCV and without the presence of another virus which affects the liver (see Data Summary).We urge health care professionals and patients to report side effects involving DAAs and other medicines to the FDA MedWatch program, using the information in the ""Contact FDA"" box at the bottom of the page.List of Direct-Acting Antivirals (DAAs)*Brand name / Active ingredient(s) / Drug Manufacturer-----------------------------------------------------Daklinza / daclatasvir / Bristol-Myers Squibb Epclusa / sofosbuvir and velpatasvir / Gilead Sciences Harvoni / ledipasvir and sofosbuvir / Gilead Sciences Olysio / simeprevir / Janssen Sovaldi / sofosbuvir / Gilead Sciences Technivie / ombitasvir and paritaprevir and ritonavir / Abbvie Viekira Pak / dasabuvir and ombitasvir and paritaprevir and ritonavir / Abbvie Viekira Pak XR / dasabuvir and ombitasvir and paritaprevir and ritonavir / Abbvie Zepatier / elbasvir and grazoprevir / Merck Sharp Dohme *DAA regimens not requiring use in combination with interferon. The DAA medicines, Victrelis (boceprevir) and Incivek (telaprevir), are not included in the list as they are used in combination with interferon and are no longer available in the USA.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[As noted below, the pathophysiology of this reactivation is unknown at this point.The Data Summary from FDA (<http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm522932.htm>) is as follows:""A search of the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database and the medical literature for cases reported and literature published between 22 Nov 2013 and 18 Jul 2016 identified 24 cases with confirmed reactivation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection who were receiving treatment with direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) for the treatment of HCV (1-7) HBV reactivation usually occurred within 4-8 weeks, 52 days on average, of starting HCV treatment. 3 of the patients decompensated, 2 of which died and 1 required hepatic transplantation.The mechanism through which HBV reactivation occurs with DAAs is currently unknown. These medicines are not known to cause immunosuppression, but HBV reactivation may result from a complex interplay of host immunologic responses in the setting of infection with 2 hepatitis viruses. HBV reactivation was not reported as an adverse event during the clinical trials supporting the applications for the DAA approvals because HBV co-infection was one of the exclusion criteria. Patients with HBV co-infection were excluded in the initial phase 3 trials to allow a characterization of drug safety, including potential liver adverse reactions, in the presence of one hepatitis virus before conducting a more complicated safety evaluation of the drugs in patients infected with 2 hepatitis viruses.12 of the 24 cases eventually received antiviral treatment active against HBV, either tenofovir or entecavir. 6 cases did not report whether the patients received HBV treatment. The remaining 6 patients did not receive HBV treatment, and the reports did not contain sufficient information to assess why HBV treatment was not initiated. Treatment for HBV was reported to have been delayed in at least 5 of the 12 cases, and 1 patient died. Possible delays in HBV treatment occurred in at least 3 other cases, and 1 of these patients required a hepatic transplantation. With HBV treatment, most patients had improvement in HBV DNA, and in other signs and symptoms such as elevated transaminases, and malaise or fatigue.In 8 of the 24 cases, when transaminases started to rise, an adverse drug reaction caused by DAA hepatotoxicity was the initial diagnosis, and the medicines were discontinued. As the condition of patients deteriorated or failed to improve, HBV reactivation was considered among the likely diagnoses. Thus, a common sequence of events was initiation of DAA-based HCV treatment, rapid drop of HCV RNA to undetectable levels within 1-2 weeks after normalization of transaminase levels (if they were elevated), followed by a rise in HBV DNA with or without increase in transaminases between weeks 4-8.The patients who developed HBV reactivation were heterogeneous in terms of HCV genotype. These patients were also heterogeneous in terms of baseline HBV disease, fitting into 3 general categories of patients: those with detectable HBV viral load (n=7), those with positive HBsAg and undetectable HBV viral load (n=4), and those with negative HBsAg and undetectable HBV viral load (n=3). For the remaining 10 patients, HBsAg status was either not known or baseline HBV could not be interpreted.""References:1. The Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS).2. Balagopal A, Thio CL: Editorial commentary: another call to cure hepatitis B. Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:1307-9.3. Collins JM, Raphael KL, Terry C, et al: Hepatitis B virus reactivation during successful treatment of hepatitis C virus with sofosbuvir and simeprevir. Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:1304-6.4. De Monte A, Courjon J, Anty R, et al: Direct-acting antiviral treatment in adults infected with hepatitis C virus: Reactivation of hepatitis B virus coinfection as a further challenge. J Clin Virol 2016;78:27-30.5. Ende AR, Kim NH, Yeh MM, Harper J, Landis CS: Fulminant hepatitis B reactivation leading to liver transplantation in a patient with chronic hepatitis C treated with simeprevir and sofosbuvir: a case report. J Med Case Rep 2015;9:164.6. Kimura H, Ohkawa K, Sakakibara M, et al: Sustained hepatitis C virus RNA clearance accompanied by elevation of hepatitis B virus DNA after short-term peginterferon-ë±, ribavirin and simeprevir therapy in chronic hepatitis patient having dual infection with hepatitis B and C viruses. Kanzo 2015;56:422-27.7. Wang C, Ji D, Chen J, Shao Q, et al: Hepatitis due to reactivation of hepatitis B virus in endemic areas among patients with hepatitis C treated with direct-acting antiviral agents. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Jul 5. pii: S1542-3565(16)30370-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2016.06.023.- Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
