News Desk [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/oklahoma-mumps-outbreak-tops-40-kay-county-child-confirmed-92978/>Oklahoma health officials today [4 Oct 2016] reported additional confirmed mumps cases, primarily in Garfield County.According to the Oklahoma State Department of Health (OSDH), the state's Epi team has reported 43 cases, with another 10 still under investigation.In addition to the Garfield County cases, OSDH has reported a confirmed case of mumps in a Kay County school-aged child and a probable case of mumps in a Kay County adult.Both cases have social connections with individuals who are part of the mumps outbreak in Garfield County. State and local public health officials are working closely with schools and healthcare providers to rapidly identify suspected mumps cases and exclude affected persons from childcare centers, schools or workplaces during the timeframe they are able to transmit mumps to other persons.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Mumps is a viral illness that is transmitted by direct contact with respiratory droplets or saliva from an infected person. It is best known for painful, swollen salivary glands that show up as puffy cheeks and a swollen jaw. Boys may also have painful, swollen testicles. Other symptoms include fever, headache, muscles aches, tiredness, and loss of appetite. There is no treatment, and symptoms usually resolve themselves within a few weeks. Mumps is usually a mild disease in children, but adults may have more serious disease with complications.""If parents observe symptoms of mumps in their child, we are strongly requesting that the child be kept at home for the 5 days after those symptoms are discovered,"" said State Epidemiologist Dr. Kristy Bradley. ""This is the most effective way to prevent the disease from spreading.""The 2 doses of the MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) vaccine that are required for school attendance are 88 per cent effective in preventing mumps.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] USA (Washington)Date: Fri 7 Oct 2016Source: Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/spokanes-whitworth-university-reports-three-mumps-cases-97428/>Spokane, WA health officials announced Wed [5 Oct 2016] 3 cases of mumps in Whitworth University students. The 1st case occurred when one of the students was exposed to mumps while traveling outside the U.S. The other 2 cases were contracted through close contact with the 1st student. All 3 individuals were fully immunized against the mumps.The 3 students are no longer contagious and were in isolation while symptomatic. To date, there are no other known or suspected cases of mumps among the Whitworth community. The risk of acquiring mumps to Spokane's general population is low.A measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine prevents most, but not all, cases of mumps. Even in a highly vaccinated population, it is possible that some people will get the illness. Whitworth requires students meet all of Washington state's immunization requirements.Close contacts of these 3 cases are being followed up on to monitor for symptoms. Whitworth University officials sent notifications to all other students and families.Nancy Hines, Whitworth communications director, said: ""We take the health of our student, faculty and staff population seriously and are taking every precaution to mitigate the spread of mumps on our campus. With these 3 cases, we have armed our campus community with the necessary information to avoid the mumps infection.""""Although we hope to contain this to just 3 cases, mumps is spread from person to person when in close contact with each other,"" said Dr. Joel McCullough, SRHD interim health officer. ""We urge individuals to make sure that they and their loved ones are up to date on the MMR vaccine.""In children, mumps is usually a mild disease. Adults may have more serious disease and more complications.Mumps is spread through saliva or mucus from the mouth, nose, or throat. An infected person can spread the virus by:- Coughing, sneezing, or talking.- Sharing items, such as cups or eating utensils, with others.- Touching objects or surfaces with unwashed hands that are then touched by others.The infectious period of mumps is 3 days before to 5 days after the onset of salivary gland swelling. Other common symptoms include fever, headache, muscle aches, tiredness, and loss of appetite.Officials from the health district and Whitworth University advise students, faculty, or staff who experience mumps symptoms to seek medical care, either through Whitworth Student Health & Counseling Center or other health care providers.Individuals who are concerned about getting the mumps can reduce their risk of becoming ill by:- Getting vaccinated against the mumps.- People who have received 2 doses of the MMR vaccine are about 9 times less likely to get mumps than unvaccinated people who have the same exposure to mumps virus.- If a vaccinated person does get mumps, they will likely have less severe illness than an unvaccinated person.- Most children and young adults have received at least one dose of the MMR vaccine. Two doses of MMR vaccine are more effective than one dose.- Always covering nose and mouth when coughing or sneezing.- Washing hands frequently.- Disposing of used tissues and other similar objects appropriately.- Avoiding sharing glasses, eating utensils, water bottles, cigarettes, and makeup.Spokane County's last confirmed mumps case was in 2009. Counting Spokane's cases, since 1 Jan 2016, state health officials confirmed 6 cases of mumps in Washington state: the 3 in Spokane County and 3 cases unrelated to Spokane's outside Spokane County. In 2015, Washington confirmed 7 cases of mumps statewide.Nationally, the CDC has reported 1897 mumps cases from 44 states through 10 Sep 2016.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is interesting to note, as in a number of previous ProMED reports, that the students were fully vaccinated when they contracted mumps. A 3rd vaccination just prior to entering college/university may be needed to boost protection for students living in close quarters. - Mod.LK]******[3] USA (Arkansas) MarshalleseDate: Fri 7 Oct 2016Source: Epi-X [edited]Not publicly availableThe Arkansas Department of Health continues to investigate and respond to a large outbreak of mumps in northwest Arkansas. The majority of cases are Marshallese and are believed to have common exposures within a local church and in school settings. MMR vaccination clinics are ongoing.Description:The Arkansas Department of Health (ADH) has been investigating an outbreak of mumps in northwest Arkansas (NWA) since mid-August [2016]. A CDC Epi-Aid team was deployed to Little Rock and NWA to assist with the outbreak response from 8 Oct 2016 until 28 Oct 2016.The index case appears to be an unvaccinated 27-year-old woman with no international travel but who was visited by an individual who traveled from an area in Iowa where mumps was spreading at that time. As of Fri 7 Oct 2016, we are aware of 427 cases (196 laboratory confirmed via PCR) and 231 Epi-linked cases or clinically diagnosed). At least 25 additional suspects have pending laboratory testing at the state public health laboratory. The majority of cases are in Marshallese (66%) and are believed to have common exposures within a local church. Transmission has spread from that site to 37 schools in 4 different school districts, 17 businesses or work places, and 30 churches. The majority of cases are 5-17 years old (66%) with an age range of 7 months-82 years. Language barriers are a major issue in conducting investigations, as the majority of cases are Marshallese or Spanish speaking, and interpreters are needed to conduct effective interviews.Vaccination clinics are ongoing. To date, approximately 2030 doses of MMR have been given at 17 vaccination clinics, and more clinics are scheduled in the coming weeks. As of today [7 Oct 2016], about 90% of cases in children are up-to-date on vaccine. In contrast, 35 per cent of adult cases are up-to-date.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Starting in August 2016, many cases of mumps have been reported in the Springdale [Arkansas] area through school and community transmission. As of Fri [7 Oct 2016], 322 suspected or lab confirmed cases have been reported in northwest Arkansas, where a large population of Marsallese live.Marshallese have been migrating from their North Pacific archipelago to the Ozark Mountains of Arkansas since the 1980s to earn money, educate their children, and seek medical care. The 2nd-largest U.S. continental population of Marshallese is concentrated in Springdale (Washington and Benton Counties; the 2010 federal census counted 4324 islanders in Arkansas).A Compact of Free Association with the United States was signed in 1986 which allows islanders to freely travel to the United States as migrants on just a passport, without visas or foreign employment credentials. Islander children born in the United States are conveyed citizenship.The unique migration arrangement led to a Marshallese diaspora in the late 1980s. Islanders have settled in Hawaii, California, and Washington, but the largest continental population is located in Springdale, Arkansas.Marshallese in Arkansas generally live in multi-family, multi-generational households. Despite the amenities the Springdale area offers to the Marshallese, only American-born Marshallese children have access to U.S. entitlements. Compact migrants cannot participate in the American political system or legally apply for Medicaid, Medicare, Social Security, or ARKids First (S-Chip) supplements, even though taxes to support such entitlements are deducted from many U.S. migrants' paychecks. As a result, Arkansas communities are burdened with providing healthcare to islanders lacking resources. The population, which now consumes a western diet, is plagued by diabetes, heart disease, tuberculosis, and obesity. Hansen's disease is endemic. A remnant elder population suffers from effects of the Cold War-era nuclear bomb tests, and some experts believe that the entire population may be immunocompromised.With federal start-up funding and support from the Arkansas Department of Health, a Marshallese clinic for working poor islanders opened in Springdale in 2011. Operating costs are shouldered by the state. An interdisciplinary and voluntary taskforce called ""Gaps in Services to Marshallese,"" made up of both public and private social and healthcare experts guided by stakeholders, is dedicated to serving the pressing needs of islanders. Of some assistance is the federal Affordable Care Act of 2010, which will allow Marshallese to purchase health insurance through the national health insurance marketplace (coverage beginning in 2014). They will be eligible for tax-credit subsidies to aid in the purchase of the insurance.Excerpted from: <http://www.encyclopediaofarkansas.net/encyclopedia/entry-detail.aspx?entryID=5972>.It is very likely this population had not been vaccinated with MMR vaccine, leading to this outbreak after exposure to an infected individual. But the vaccination clinics described in the report above should go a long way towards stopping this current outbreak. The best way to prevent a mumps outbreak is for a population to have a vaccination rate of at least 90-95 per cent to build herd immunity.A map of the US showing Oklahoma, Washington, and Arkansas is available at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>. - Mod.LK]
