WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/> Influenza update - 273 (based on data up to 18 Sep 2016)--------------------------------------------------------SummaryInfluenza activity varied in countries of temperate South America, was ongoing in South Africa and decreased in Oceania. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere was at inter-seasonal levels. - In temperate South America, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity decreased throughout most of the sub-region. In Chile, influenza-like illness (ILI) and laboratory confirmed influenza and RSV virus detections remained elevated; influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 was predominant with co-circulation of A(H3N2)viruses and influenza B viruses. In Paraguay, ILI and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) cases remained elevated. Respiratory syncytial virus activity remained elevated in the region.- In South Africa, influenza detections continued, with mainly influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus detections following a predominance of influenza B and then A(H3N2) viruses earlier in the season. - In Oceania, influenza virus activity decreased in the last weeks. Influenza A(H3N2) remained the dominant circulating influenza virus. In Australia, activity decreased but was still high, while in New Zealand ILI consultation rates remained below the seasonal baseline level. - In the Caribbean countries, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained low throughout most of the sub-region. The exception was Cuba with a slight increase of influenza B virus detections in the recent weeks. In Central America, influenza virus activity remained low but in most of the countries, detections of non-influenza respiratory viruses stayed elevated with RSV predominating. - In tropical South America, influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and RSV virus detections generally decreased in recent weeks or remained low in most of the countries. In Colombia, influenza activity remained low while RSV activity increased. In Peru, influenza activity continued to decrease, with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and influenza B viruses co-circulating. - In West, Central and temperate East Asia, influenza activity remained low. In tropical countries of South Asia, influenza activity was generally low with seasonal influenza A and B viruses co-circulating in the region.- In South East Asia, there was a decreasing trend in influenza detection in recent weeks, although some countries in the region reported ongoing activity of co-circulating seasonal influenza A and B viruses.- Sporadic cases of influenza A(H3N2) and influenza B virus infection were reported by northern, middle and western Africa in recent weeks, among the few countries reporting data during this period. In East Africa, Madagascar continued to report influenza B detections. - In North America and Europe, influenza activity was low with few influenza virus detections. ILI levels were below seasonal thresholds. In the United States, other respiratory virus activity increased with RSV predominating. - Influenza activity was low in temperate Asia.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 73 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 5 Sep 2016 to 18 Sep 2016 (data as of 30 Sep 2016 03:56:53 UTC).The WHO GISRS laboratories tested more than 44178 specimens during that time period. 2763 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 2260 (81.8 percent) were typed as influenza A and 503 (18.2 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 246 (12 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 1812 (88 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 31 (24.6 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 95 (75.4 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The detailed report can be accessed at the URL above.Overall the influenza activity remained low in most regions except some countries in temperate South America, South Africa, and Cuba in the Caribbean. Among influenza A viruses, influenza A(H3N2) remained the dominant circulating influenza virus while influenza B-Victoria lineage was detected at a higher rate. No novel influenza subtypes or variants were reported during this period. - Mod.UBA]
