Sun Daily [edited]<http://www.thesundaily.my/news/1996908>Rotavirus outbreak due to contaminated water--------------------------------------------Investigations confirmed that the recent rotavirus outbreak was due to the contaminated water at the Bukit Merah Laketown Resort water park. The Perak Health director Datuk Dr Juita Ghazalie said investigations and laboratory results concluded that the water park was the source of the outbreak and the possible exposure date was 24 Sep 2016.""Almost all patients gave a history of visiting the same resort, thus we can say that the outbreak was due to exposure to contaminated water on that day at the resort. The department has stopped monitoring the outbreak since no new cases have emerged and the incubation period for rotavirus is no more than 3 days,"" she said in a statement today [9 Oct 2016].Dr Juita said since the last case was reported on 1 Oct 2016, the monitoring duration is already beyond 2 incubation periods. She said active measures are now being taken by the resort management to clean the water park.Meanwhile Director-General of Health Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah recently said that water samples taken at the water park on 29 and 30 Sep 2016 tested negative for the virus. He said the negative results could be due to cleaning and chlorine sanitization exercises conducted on 24 Sep 2016 before the water samples were taken by health authorities.The ministry recorded 30 confirmed rotavirus cases among those who visited the water park beginning on 24 Sep 2016. He said that out of 70 people who came down with acute gastroenteritis, 42.9 percent tested positive for rotavirus, adding that Perak had 6 confirmed cases, Kedah (16), and Penang (8).--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts <promed@promedmail.org>[It is implied that the rotavirus infections were acquired from the water in the recreational activities at the water park but it is possible that the transmission was related to food at the park.In 1973, Bishop and colleagues observed a virus particle in the intestinal tissue of children with diarrhea by using electron micrography. This virus was subsequently called ""rotavirus"" because of its similarity in appearance to a wheel (rota is Latin for wheel). By 1980, rotavirus was recognized as the most common cause of severe gastroenteritis in infants and young children in the USA. It is now known that infection with rotavirus is nearly universal, with almost all children infected by 5 years of age. Prior to vaccine implementation, rotavirus was responsible for 20-60 deaths per year in the United States and up to 500 000 deaths from diarrhea worldwide. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/2293>.]
