Daily Mail, Reuters report [edited]<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/reuters/article-3812758/The-cost-cheap-drugs-Toxic-Indian-lake-superbug-hotspot.html>Centuries ago, Indian princes would bathe in the cool Kazhipally Lake in Medak [district, Telangana]. Now, even the poorest villagers here in India's baking south point to the barren banks and frothy water and say they avoid going anywhere near it. A short drive from the bustling tech hub of Hyderabad, Medak is the heart of India's antibiotics manufacturing business: a district of about 2.5 million that has become one of the world's largest suppliers of cheap drugs to most markets, including the United States.But community activists, researchers, and some drug company employees say the presence of more than 300 drug firms, combined with lax oversight and inadequate water treatment, has left lakes and rivers laced with antibiotics, making this a giant Petri dish for antimicrobial resistance. ""Resistant bacteria are breeding here and will affect the whole world,"" said [KR], a doctor and activist who has been working in Patancheru, a Medak industrial zone where many drug manufacturers have bases, for more than 2 decades.Drugmakers in Medak, including large Indian firms Dr Reddy's Laboratories Ltd, Aurobindo Pharma Ltd, and Hetero Drugs Ltd, and US giant Mylan Inc, say they comply with local environmental rules and do not discharge effluent into waterways. National and local government are divided on the scale of the problem.While the Central Pollution Control Board (PCB) in New Delhi categorises Medak's Patancheru area as ""critically polluted"", the state PCB says its own monitoring shows the situation has improved. The rise of drug-resistant ""superbugs"" is a growing threat to modern medicine, with the emergence in the past year of infections resistant to even last-resort antibiotics. In the United States alone, antibiotic-resistant bacteria cause 2 million serious infections and 23 000 deaths annually, according to health officials.Last week [week of 19 Sep 2016], 13 leading drugmakers promised to clean up pollution from factories making antibiotics as part of a drive to fight the rise of drug-resistant superbugs, while United Nations member countries pledged for the 1st time to take steps to tackle the threat.Patancheru is one of the main pharmaceutical manufacturing hubs in Telangana state, where the sector accounts for around 30 per cent of GDP [gross domestic product], according to commerce ministry data. Drug exports from state capital Hyderabad are worth around USD 14 billion annually.Local doctor [KR] pointed to studies by scientists from Sweden's University of Gothenburg that have found very high levels of pharmaceutical pollution in and around Kazhipally Lake, along with the presence of antibiotic-resistant genes. The scientists have been publishing research on pollution in the area for nearly a decade. Their 1st study, in 2007, said antibiotic concentrations in effluent from a treatment plant used by drug factories were higher than would be expected in the blood of patients undergoing a course of treatment. That effluent was discharged into local lakes and rivers, they said. ""The polluted lakes harboured considerably higher proportions of ciprofloxacin-resistant and sulfamethoxazole-resistant bacteria than did other Indian and Swedish lakes included for comparison,"" said their latest report, in 2015, referring to the generic names of 2 widely used antibiotics.Those findings are disputed by local government officials and industry representatives. The Hyderabad-based Bulk Drug Manufacturers Association of India (BDMAI) said the state pollution control board had found no antibiotics in its own study of water in Kazhipally Lake. The state PCB did not provide a copy of this report, despite several requests from Reuters.""I have not seen any credible report that says that the drugs are no longer there,"" Joakim Larsson, a professor of environmental pharmacology at the University of Gothenburg who led the 1st Swedish study and took part in the others, told Reuters by email. ""There might very well have been improvements, but without data, I do not know.""Local activists and researchers say the Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) built in Medak in the 1990s was ill equipped to handle large volumes of pharmaceutical waste. After protests and court cases brought by local villagers, a 20-km (12-mi) pipeline was built to take effluent to another plant near Hyderabad. But activists say that merely diverted the problem -- waste sent there, they say, mixes with domestic sewage before the treated effluent is discharged into the Musi River [Deccan Plateau, Telangana].A study published this year [2016] by researchers from the Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, found very high levels of broad-spectrum antibiotics in the Musi, a tributary of the Krishna, one of India's longest rivers. Local government officials responsible for the plants did not respond to Reuters' requests for comment.Nearly a dozen current and former officials from companies producing medicines in Patancheru told Reuters that factory staff from various firms often illegally dump untreated chemical effluent into boreholes inside plants, or even directly into local water bodies at night. All the officials spoke on condition of anonymity and Reuters was unable to independently verify those allegations.Major manufacturers in the area, including Dr Reddy's and Mylan, said they operated so-called zero liquid discharge (ZLD) technology and processed waste onsite. ""Mylan is not dumping any effluent into the environment, borewells, or the CETP,"" said spokeswoman Nina Devlin. Dr Reddy's said it recycled water onsite and complied with all environmental regulations.The same industry officials who spoke to Reuters said the pollution control board rarely checked waste-treatment practices at factories, adding that penalties for breaches were meagre. The Telangana state government did not respond to requests for comment.""We are aware some companies are releasing more than the allowed effluent, but they are profit-making companies,"" said state PCB spokesman N Raveendher. ""We do try and take action against the offenders, but we cannot kill the industry also."" Many smaller companies also lacked the funds to install expensive machinery for treating waste, he added.A series of local court cases have been filed stretching back 2 decades, accusing drug companies of pollution and local authorities of poor checks. In some cases, companies have been ordered to pay annual compensation to villagers, but many are still grinding through India's tortuous legal system.[WA], 50, owns 5 acres [2 ha] of land near the shores of Kazhipally Lake, where he grew rice until a decade ago. He says the worsening industrial pollution from several nearby pharmaceutical factories left his land barren. ""We have protested, sued, and done all sorts of things over the years ... that's how some of us are now getting around 1700 rupees (roughly USD 20; USD 1 = about 67 Indian rupees) a year from the companies,"" he said. ""But what can you do with that small sum today?"" More than 200 companies were named as respondents in the case he was referring to, filed by a non-profit organisation on behalf of villagers.While pollution of farmland is a serious problem for villagers who depend on it for their livelihood, the potential incubation of ""superbugs"" in Medak's waterways has wider implications. The issue is particularly worrisome in India, where many waterways also contain harmful bacteria from human sewage. The more such bacteria are exposed to antibiotics, the greater the chances they will mutate and render such drugs ineffective against them. The risk is that resistant bacteria would then infect people and be spread by travel.So far, most of the focus worldwide on antimicrobial resistance has been on over-use of drugs in human medicine and farming. ""Pollution from antibiotic factories is a 3rd big factor in causing antimicrobial resistance,"" the chairman of one of the world's largest drugmakers told Reuters. ""But it is largely overlooked.""[byline: Zeba Siddiqui, Ben Hirschler, Clara Ferreira Marques, Alex Richardson]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Antibiotics are produced naturally by various microbes that inhibit or kill other microbes in their immediate environment and these other microbes in their immediate environment would have developed resistance to these antimicrobial compounds, otherwise they would not have survived. So, it is not surprising that a team from the California Polytechnic State University reportedly found antibiotic resistance genes in human feces from ancient 11th century Incan mummies (<http://www.ndtv.com/world-news/antibiotic-resistant-genes-discovered-in-11th-century-mummy-1235286>), almost 1000 years before Sir Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928.Before the 1950s, however, the selective pressure exerted by the presence of antibiotics occurred only within the immediate vicinity of the antibiotic-producing organisms. Now, antibiotics are being produced on a massive scale. Between 2000 and 2010, total global antibiotic consumption is reported to have grown by more than 30 per cent (<https://cddep.org/sites/default/files/swa_2015_final.pdf>).Although per capita consumption is generally higher in high-income countries, the greatest increase in antibiotic use has been in low- and middle-income countries, where there has been increasing prosperity leading to increased demand. 80 per cent of human use is occurring in the community, either prescribed by healthcare providers or purchased directly without prescriptions (<https://cddep.org/sites/default/files/swa_2015_final.pdf>) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that 30 per cent of antibiotic prescriptions in the US are unnecessary (<http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2016/p0503-unnecessary-prescriptions.html>).Similarly, increasing prosperity has lead to increasing demand for animal protein, which has lead to intensive food animal production and the consequent greater use of antibiotics for prevention of infection and growth promotion of these food animals. More than 70 per cent of the antibiotics used in the US are for animal husbandry (<http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/phg/content_level_pages/issue_briefs/hhifibrecommendationsforfdafactsheetpdf.pd>).The increasing use of antibiotics in both human and veterinary practice and their careless discharge, often accompanied by antibiotic resistance genes, into the environment in pharmaceutical industrial, farm, and human waste have contributed to the increasing presence of antibiotics in the environment. Although human and food animal consumption of antibiotics exerts selective pressure on microbial communities that reside in or on their bodies, the increasing presence of antibiotics and antibiotic resistance genes in the environment can possibly exert selective pressure on microbial populations outside the body, but this requires further study. (<http://jac.oxfordjournals.org/content/52/1/5.full>, <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749109002942>, and <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4034546/>).Antibiotics can not only exert selective pressure for emergence of resistance to that and related antibiotics, an antibiotic may co-select for resistance to another class of antibiotics if either the same mechanism, that is, an efflux pump, provides resistance to both or if the resistance genes are linked and are co-selected. In addition, metals such as copper, fed to animals for growth promotion, or biocides such as triclosan may also co-select for resistance to antibiotics, such as colistin, whose resistance is genetically linked to that of the metal or biocide, even in the absence of exposure to that antibiotic (ProMED-mail post Antibiotic resistance - Portugal: colistin, MCR-1, Salmonella, Cu tolerance 20160703.4323241). Environmental pollution with these co-selecting agents may also exert selective pressure for emergence of antibiotic resistance. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/56053>.]
