Plymouth Herald [edited]<http://www.plymouthherald.co.uk/plymouth-parents-warned-over-measles-outbreak/story-29783727-detail/story.html>Plymouth parents and teachers have again been issued a warning following a measles outbreak at a Devon school. Public Health England has written to mums and dads informing them that the illness continues to circulate the county following an outbreak King Edward VI Community College (KEVICC) in Totnes [Devon] during the summer [2016]. The health body says that the majority of cases are found in children of secondary school age. But they have issued a warning to parents with children throughout the education system, down to pre-school and nursery ages.There were 15 cases of measles in Totnes during the summer, with another 11 suspected cases. And public health chiefs are again urging people to ensure their children have had the MMR vaccination, which provides immunisation against measles, mumps, and rubella.The statement from Public Health England says: ""Measles is a highly infectious viral illness spread through coughing and sneezing and close personal contact. Most people feel very unwell but do recover completely from measles, however, on rare occasions there can be serious complications. The 1st stage of measles includes a runny nose, conjunctivitis (red eyes), a cough, and an increasing fever that comes and goes. A rash appears on day 3 or 4 while the individual is still feverish and miserable. Anyone with suspected measles should be excluded from school or work until 5 days after the rash first appears.""Measles is a highly infectious disease which can affect anyone, but is commonest in children under the age of 7. In most cases it is unpleasant, but will clear in around a week. However, it can lead to serious and sometimes fatal complications.In mid-June [2016], Public Health England (PHE) issued a warning to parents after one case of measles, which is a notifiable disease, was confirmed.Two doses of the MMR vaccine offer high protection against measles provided the 1st dose is given after 12 months of age.Dr Sarah Harrison, consultant in health protection for Public Health England in the south west, said communities like schools were particularly at risk [if] immunisation levels were low. ""Measles is a very infectious disease, and can spread rapidly among communities such as schools if people have not been fully immunised,"" she said.""While most people who catch measles will recover completely within a couple of weeks, it is important to remember that measles can be a very serious illness that can leave permanent disability, and occasionally even kill. About 1 in 15 children with measles will suffer from complications such as pneumonia or ear or eye infections. I would appeal to any parents who have not yet had their children immunised to get them protected as soon as possible through their GP. Children should receive 2 doses of MMR vaccine for maximum protection. MMR not only protects them, but also limits the chances of the virus spreading more widely, for example to children who are too young to have the vaccine and to people who may be more vulnerable to the disease. It is important to remember that MMR is a highly effective and safe vaccine.""What is measles?----------------Measles is a highly infectious viral illness which can sometimes lead to serious complications.The initial symptoms develop around 10 days after infection and can include:- cold-like symptoms, such as a runny nose, sneezing, and a cough;- sore, red eyes that may be sensitive to light;- a high temperature, which may reach around 40 deg C (104 deg F);- small greyish-white spots on the inside of the cheeks.A few days later, a red-brown blotchy rash will appear. This usually starts on the head or upper neck, before spreading outwards to the rest of the body. Spots are initially small but quickly get bigger and often join together.Why should I get my child immunised?------------------------------------Measles used to be uncommon in the UK because of a phenomenon known as herd immunity. This occurs when the vaccination of a significant portion of a population provides a measure of protection for individuals who have not developed immunity.It arises when a high percentage of the population is protected through vaccination against a virus or bacteria, making it difficult for a disease to spread because there are so few susceptible people left to infect.This can effectively stop the spread of disease in the community. It is particularly crucial for protecting people who cannot be vaccinated. These include children who are too young to be vaccinated, people with immune system problems, and those who are too ill to receive vaccines, such as some cancer patients.Is there a problem with the MMR vaccine?----------------------------------------The MMR vaccine controversy began in 1998 with the publication of a paper in The Lancet by medic Andrew Wakefield, which linked it to autism. Further investigations revealed the author had numerous undeclared conflicts of interest, had broken ethical codes, and manipulated evidence. The Lancet subsequently fully retracted the article describing it as ""utterly false"" and saying the respected medical journal had been ""deceived"". Wakefield was subsequently found guilty of serious professional misconduct and struck off the medical register. The scientific consensus is that MMR has no link to autism, however vaccination rates dropped sharply.How soon can my child go back to school?----------------------------------------Measles is most infectious from 4 days before the appearance of the rash until 4 days after. Children should be kept off school until 5 days after the onset of the rash.[byline: Jon Lewis]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Measles in the UK has been linked to summer festivals. See: ProMED-mail. Measles update (49): UK (S. Wales) summer festivals, Romania 20160925.4513493. But this is only because the level of herd immunity required to keep measles in check has not been maintained. The best means of containment of measles is the maintenance of high initial levels of measles immunity in the population through vaccination. Which begs the question, how best to convince antivaccinationists of the need for vaccination. Education is the key, and perhaps the rapid dissemination of information on the spread of measles in the absence of vaccination through such organizations as ProMED-mail may facilitate appreciation of the need for vaccination and the safety of vaccines.Maps of the United Kingdom may be found at <http://www.ezilon.com/maps/images/europe/physical-map-of-UK.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>. - Mod.LK]
