Sourceable [edited]<https://sourceable.net/australias-first-confirmed-case-of-black-lung-disease-from-open-cut-mine/>Mining communities throughout Australia are on alert after confirmation of Australia's 1st case of black lung [pneumoconiosis] disease in an open cut coal mine worker at BHP Billiton's Goonyella Riverside Mine in Central Queensland's Bowen Basin. Mr [PH] reported that in his 31 years working as an open cut coal miner who has never worked underground, he had only ever received one chest x-ray when he first started working in the mines.CFMEU [Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union] Mining and Energy Division Queensland district president Stephen Smyth, said workers and communities in all states and territories with underground and open-cut coal mines were now clearly at risk. ""It's a myth that miners working in open cut mines are not exposed to high levels of coal dust or at risk of developing irreversible and fatal black lung and other dust related diseases,"" said Mr Smyth. ""So far, industry and governments have been assuming this problem is isolated to underground mines -- we now know this is a false assumption. The union is again urging mining companies to immediately address dust levels in all coalmines and keep dust levels below legal limits,"" Mr Smyth said.The emergence of a confirmed case of black lung in an Australian open cut mine follows a 2012 study of surface coal miners in the US that revealed one in 50 workers in surface coalmines had developed coal workers' pneumoconiosis, or black lung [1]. Mr Smyth said that due to the similarities between the United States and Australian mining, it is estimated this figure would be comparable in Australia, if not higher.""The current legal dust exposure limits in Queensland are insufficient and are also not being appropriately monitored to prevent excess dust exposure. Mining companies in Queensland have allowed dust levels in the mines to spike often well above these legal limits with no regard for the health of the miners. These operations must immediately start using more effective dust monitoring and control methods to reduce this deadly health risk and at the very least to comply with legal permissible levels,"" Mr Smyth said.Mr Smyth also signaled this new case of black lung disease as a warning to mine operators in other states with open cut coal mines, especially in NSW [New South Wales] and Victoria. ""This should put all governments on notice -- black lung disease is not just a threat to coal miners working in underground mines in Queensland, but to miners at all coalmines across Australia. ""This also underlines the importance of an industry levy to support a victims' fund given the national significance of the issue."" This is the 16th officially confirmed case of black lung in Queensland coal miners since 2015. This is the 1st case of black lung disease in a miner in an open cut mine. All previous cases have been recorded in underground mines. As at 30 Jun 2015 there were 39 128 coal miners in Australia [2].Based on recent sampling, as many as 1 in 15 coal miners may have black lung disease.Queensland has higher legal permissible dust limits than the United States or New South Wales:- Queensland: 3 mg per cubic metre- New South Wales: 2.5 mg per cubic metre- United States: 1.5 mg per cubic metreAccording to data reported by mining companies themselves, average dust levels have been well above the legal limit.In 2013, 25 000 deaths were attributed to black lung disease globally [3].Black lung is 100 per cent preventable and Australia was thought to have eradicated the disease.References----------1. CDC. Pneumoconiosis and advanced occupational lung disease among surface coal miners - 16 states 2010-2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012 Jun 15;61(23):431-4.2. Australian Bureau of Statistics - 8415.0 - Mining Operations, Australia, 2014-15 <http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8415.0>.3. Coal worker's pneumoconiosis: an Australian perspective. Med J Aust. August 2016 <https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2016/204/11/coal-workers-pneumoconiosis-australian-perspective>.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[One has to wonder if this discovery of pneumoconiosis or black lung in the open cut mines is a result of the increased testing done in Australia. ProMED-mail posted on this increase in surveillance in Pneumoconiosis - Australia: (QL) 20160107.3916319.Coal worker's pneumoconiosis (also known as black lung because of the black dust of the coal) is a lung disease that results from breathing in dust from coal, graphite, or man-made carbon over a long period of time. The risk of getting coal worker's pneumoconiosis depends on how long the worker has been around coal dust. Most people with this disease are older than 50. Smoking does not increase your risk of developing this disease, but it may have an additional harmful effect on the lungs. Primary symptoms are shortness of breath and coughing.There is no specific treatment for this disorder. Further exposure to the dust should be avoided. The outcome for the simple form is usually good. It rarely causes disability or death. The complicated form may cause shortness of breath that gets progressively worse.Workers should wear a protective mask when working around coal, graphite, or man-made carbon. Companies should enforce the maximum permitted dust levels. All workers should avoid smoking.The report above suggests that open cut miners may not have been thought to be at risk and therefore not subjected to regular checks. Our previous report suggested that the lung radiographs of the workers may not even have been checked, citing lack of resources, and noted that miners were not given feedback. In this age of telemedicine digital radiographs (x-rays) could be sent to trained radiologist elsewhere if local services were inadequate.It is al so worth considering whether the exhaust fans in the mines are regulated, whether the workers wear protective masks, and how long they spend in the mine. There are probably more questions than answers at present, but perhaps it is time that more aggressive measures are put in place to prevent this condition.Portions of this comment have been extracted from <https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000130.htm>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/285>.]
