The Hindu [edited]<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/in-odisha-48-encephalitis-deaths-in-four-weeks/article9212342.ece>With 3 more children succumbing to it, the death toll due to Japanese encephalitis (JE) increased to 48 in a span of 4 weeks in Odisha's backward Malkangiri district on Wednesday [12 Oct 2016] even as the administration continued to grapple with the outbreak. 2 children died in the ICU of the district headquarters hospital early in the morning, and another died during the day. At least 61 affected children are undergoing treatment in the hospital.A mosquito-control drive has been intensified in most regions of Malkangiri district where children have fallen victims to JE. While more than 12 000 mosquito nets had been distributed in the affected areas, fogging has been intensified to check the culex mosquitoes that transmit Japanese encephalitis virus. Hordes of pigs that carry the killer virus have been kept in enclosures and hundreds of pigs have been killed by the villagers to stop spread of the virus. Cooked food is being provided to pregnant and lactating women and malnourished ailing children.The district collector of Malkangiri served a show-cause notice to 22 nodal officers of the district for alleged dereliction of duty in tackling Japanese encephalitis. Health secretary Arti Ahuja visited the affected region to take stock of the situation. The department was taking every possible step to control of the spread of JE, she told reporters.--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org >[The number of fatalities in this area continues to increase. A 13 Oct 2016 report indicated that there are 2 more fatalities, bringing the total to 50. The report added that a total of 9454 pigs have been kept inside the enclosures away from the affected villages of which 7040 pigs are kept in 104 government enclosures and 2414 pigs in 36 private enclosures (<http://odishatv.in/odisha/body-slider/encephalitis-outbreak-admn-steps-up-sanitation-measures-in-malkangiri-170560/>). As noted in recent posts, health officials are becoming concerned with this trend and have focused preventive efforts on village pigs and mosquito control. The presence of pigs in villages of the district is a reasonable worry, since pigs are amplifying hosts of Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus. Mosquito vector control is difficult in areas of extensive wetland breeding sites. Fogging provides only temporary reduction in vector mosquito numbers. Bed nets will be helpful in preventing mosquito bites. As noted earlier, again it seems curious that in all these recent reports no mention is made of vaccination. That would be the most effective measure for prevention of JE in this susceptible population.Maps of India can be accessed at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/315>. - Mod.TY]******[2] Poorvanchal region, Uttar Pradesh stateDate: Sun 9 Oct 2016Source: The Times of India [edited]<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/Encephalitis-widens-its-net-112-new-cases-reported/articleshow/54762305.cms>The spike in cases of encephalitis in Poorvanchal region has put district administration on tenterhooks. 112 new cases of encephalitis were reported in the region, putting a question mark on the administration's vaccination programme.After mass vaccination drives in 2006 and 2010, the proportion of mosquitoborne encephalitis cases had fallen to 2-3 per cent but the rise in mosquitoborne encephalitis cases in last 2 months has raised left health officials red-faced.""The district administration needs to monitor the encephalitis vaccination program as has been done in the case of polio vaccination,"" said Dr KP Kushwaha, former principal of BRD Medical College.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Although according to a 6 Sep 2016 ProMED-mail post, the number of deaths from encephalitis in the BRD Medical College Hospital had risen from 224 on 4 Sep 2016 (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20160905.4467223) to 254 as reported above, apparently not all were from the Poorvanchal region. Cases in that region are increasing, adding 112 new cases to the number. The above report mentions mosquitoborne encephalitis, doubtless referring to Japanese encephalitis.Cases of encephalitis are common in Uttar Pradesh state at this time of the year. Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus is endemic in north eastern India and more cases can be expected over the remainder of the transmission season, which one hopes is drawing to a close. The Gorakhpur district of Uttar Pradesh state has been an active focus of JE cases annually. The above report does not indicate if the new cases had been tested for JE or had been vaccinated for it previously. - Mod.TY]******[3] Climate change effectsDate: Wed 12 Oct 2016Source: India Climate Dialogue [edited]<http://indiaclimatedialogue.net/2016/10/12/japanese-encephalitis-surges-changing-climate/>In July this year [2016], the death of a 4 year old girl in Manipur [state] due to Japanese encephalitis unleashed panic in the state. This was the 1st death from the deadly viral brain infection, transmitted by the culex mosquito, since 2010. Manipur has seen a surge in the virus this year, recording 45 cases this season, leading to 2 deaths, Sasheekumar Mangang, head of epidemiology in the Manipur health department, told indiaclimatedialogue.net.Japanese encephalitis is characterised by the inflammation of the brain and high fever. There is no medical treatment for the disease, and as with other viruses, patients are treated for the symptoms they develop. Fatality rates for severe [neurological] infections hover between 20-30 per cent, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).Assam, an Indian state that neighbours Manipur, has also had a deluge of Japanese encephalitis cases -- 304 cases so far this year [2016] with 1256 cases of acute encephalitis syndrome (which doctors say is linked to the virus) -- leading to over 200 deaths, according to data from the health department.As the central government declared Japanese encephalitis (JE) a notifiable disease last month [September 2016] -- which means all cases have to be reported to local authorities in order to halt further spread of the virus -- experts blame climate change as one of the main reasons for the surge.Manifold increaseIn Assam, the number of annual cases has risen almost 5-fold from 154 in 2010 to 744 in 2014; deaths rose from 41 to 160 in the same period.Patowary, a senior official in the Assam health department, said, ""Climate change is one of the reasons for vector-borne diseases like JE becoming a threat for longer periods in the year. Erratic rainfall and warmer months extending up to October-November is resulting in mosquitoes like the culex finding an ideal environment to breed."" The disease, which was earlier reported in the months of May-July, is now claiming a large number of victims until much later in the year.""Mangang from the Manipur health department agrees. ""Change in climatic conditions -- extended periods of warm days, erratic rainfall causing flash floods, and thereby water stagnation -- are contributing towards suitable breeding environment for the JE vector.""The virus has also spread from a few ""endemic"" places in upper Assam, to all 27 districts in recent years.Nearby western Myanmar is also facing a Japanese encephalitis outbreak. So far 45 cases have been reported among children in Rakhine state, resulting in 6 deaths. Cases have been reported in 4 of its townships -- Sittwe, Ponnagyun, Pawktau, Kyauktaw. Authorities have launched a vaccination drive only in Sittwe because a lack of resources. Sittwe, as the most densely populated city, is considered a priority area -- with 80 000 children being inoculated against the deadly virus. A public health official said that 5 of the 7 children who had contracted JE in Sittwe has been discharged from the hospital but had not regained their ability to speak.Similar patterns across AsiaResearchers across Asia are finding similar links between changing climate and mosquitoborne diseases. A 2013 research paper on 'Climate change and mosquito-borne diseases in China' also links variability in temperature, precipitation, wind, and extreme weather events with the transmission of mosquitoborne diseases [including JE] in some parts of China. The paper co-authored by Li Bai, Lindsay Carol Morton and Liu Qiyong, says, ""Global warming might change temperature and rainfall patterns which may affect the development and infection capacity of both the mosquito and the virus (that causes JE). Relative humidity is also important in the transmission of JE because mosquitoes can survive longer and disperse further in areas with suitable humidity..."" The paper notes that JE has spread to new parts of China, including high altitude areas of Tibet.Another research paper on climate change and JE in Taiwan says, ""From a socio-ecological viewpoint, an outbreak of JE may be facilitated by 2 factors -- that is, global climate change and modulation of agriculture (such as adoption of paddy agriculture, use of pesticides, and creation of modern pig farms)."" Pigs are one of the main carriers [amplifiers] of the disease.Shifts in farming patternsShifts in cropping or agriculture patterns -- again because of climate change -- is further aiding the spread of JE. Both Assam and Manipur, like the other Indian north eastern states, mostly cultivate rice. With changing climate patterns, paddy farmers here have realised that they can grow their crop until much later in the year.Talukdar, a senior official in the Assam health department said, ""The culex mosquito breeds in the water in the agricultural land. Since warmer months for longer periods of the year have enabled farmers to grow more crops of rice each year, it gives more time and space for mosquitoes to breed.""Lalit Kant, senior advisor on infectious diseases at the Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) adds, ""Studies from Assam show that the practices of paddy cultivation, domiciliary surroundings with adjacent water bodies, and high temperature and humidity were influencing the abundance of the potential mosquito vectors responsible for transmission of the virus in the rural community.""Floods and pigs increase risksFloods have made the situation worse. This year, Assam faced what experts said was the worst floods in 20 years. It came in 3 waves and affected 4.1 million people, destroying crops and property. After the rains and the immediate destruction end, the threat of disease grows -- both waterborne and vectorborne. Standing water, yet again, makes for a perfect breeding ground for mosquitoes, and cases of malaria and JE surge.""A similar situation exists in Nepal, and studies have been undertaken to assess the link between the increase in JE cases and climate change,"" Kant said. He also mentions the correlation between pig farms and JE, since pigs (and birds) are the main host for the virus.An increase in pig rearing in Assam -- a lucrative option for farmers -- could therefore be another contributing factor. ""Pig rearing in close quarters to domestic households, because of lack of space, is another reason for the rise in JE in Manipur,"" said Mangang.Taking actionTo tackle the growing problem, states facing outbreaks are encouraging people to get vaccinated. Although children are said to be more vulnerable, with children aged 1-5 being vaccinated, JE seems to be striking adults with equal ferocity. In Manipur, according to the state health department, 75 per cent of the JE cases were found in adults above the age of 20. ""There are ample reasons to suspect that there are new strains of JE,"" Mangang said.This puts the focus on awareness campaigns on adult vaccinations. In Assam, a study said that adults were more vulnerable to JE -- possibly because of exposure in paddy fields.According to Pradeep Haldar, deputy commissioner of immunisation at the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, adult vaccination campaigns have been launched in 21 ""high-burden"" districts in Assam, West Bengal, and Uttar Pradesh, identified by the National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme.""Climate change is a reality. So the only way to protect against vector-borne diseases is vaccination and more awareness about how to prevent mosquitoes from breeding,"" Patowary said.[byline: Azera Parveen Rahman ]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[References: Li Bai, Lindsay Carol Morton, Qiyong Liu. Climate change and mosquito-borne diseases in China: a review. Globalization and Health 2013; 9:10 DOI: 10.1186/1744-8603-9-10.SM Hsu, AMF Yen, THH Chen. The impact of climate on Japanese encephalitis. Epidemiol Infect. 2008 Jul; 136(7): 980-987. DOI: 10.1017/S0950268807009454.This report provides a helpful overview of JE epidemiological factors and climate change effects over geographic occurrence of the virus in north eastern India and adjoining countries. It is good to see emphasis placed on vaccination of both children and adults. - Mod.TY]
