Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/niger-rift-valley-fever-update-90-cases-28-deaths-93413/>In an update on the Rift Valley fever (RVF) outbreak in western Niger, the World Health Organization (WHO) puts the case tally at 90, including 28 deaths, according to a Thomson Reuters Foundation report. The outbreak started in August [2016] in the Tahoua region.The fear from UN health officials is that the viral disease my spread in West Africa. ""Herders migrating with infected livestock pose the biggest risk of the epidemic crossing borders,"" Oumarou Maidadji, medical coordinator for The Alliance for International Medical Action (ALIMA), told the Thomson Reuters Foundation by phone.Nomadic stockbreeders from Niger and neighboring countries have just participated in the Cure Sal̩e festival, a major annual mass gathering event from 23-25 Sep [2016]. During this festival, herds are brought to graze on the salty pastures ahead of the dry season. Around 2 million cattle and even more small ruminants were expected to be part of the event.Rift Valley fever is a mosquitoborne virus that is endemic in parts of Africa including South Africa. It primarily infects animals like sheep, cattle and goats and it can have an economic impact on a community due to the loss of livestock. Humans get infected through contact with infected animal blood or organs. Butchering and slaughtering of animals is a primary cause of transmission to humans. Certain occupations are at a higher risk of getting Rift Valley fever like farmers, herders and veterinarians. It can also be transmitted to humans through mosquito bites and the bites of blood-sucking flies.Most cases of Rift Valley fever are mild and symptoms include fever, headaches and muscle pain. However, a small percentage of people can get serious disease which includes retinitis, encephalitis and a hemorrhagic fever. Fatalities happen in less than 1 per cent of those infected.[byline: Robert Herriman]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The number of human Rift Valley fever (RVF) cases has increased over those given in the 29 Sep 2016 ProMED-mail post (archive no. 20160929.4525684). It seems odd that no RVF cases in livestock are mentioned. The nomadic stockbreeders from Niger and neighboring countries who have just participated in the Cure Sal̩e festival may have already moved on with their flocks. Increased surveillance within the broad area would be prudent.Mod.CRD's excellent earlier comment stated, ""Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a peracute or acute zoonotic disease of domestic ruminants. The virus is confined to the African continent and Arabian Peninsula. It is caused by a single serotype of a mosquito-borne virus of the _Bunyaviridae_ family (genus _Phlebovirus_). The disease occurs in climatic conditions favouring the breeding of mosquito vectors and is characterised by abortion, neonatal mortality and liver damage. The disease is most severe in sheep, goats, and cattle. Older non-pregnant animals, although susceptible to infection, are more resistant to clinical disease. There is considerable variation in the susceptibility to RVF of animals of different species. Camels usually have an inapparent infection with RVF virus (RVFV), but sudden mortality, neonatal mortality, and abortion occur and abortion rates can be as high as in cattle. Humans are susceptible to RVFV and are infected through contact with infected animal material (body fluids or tissues) or through bites from infected mosquitoes.""Maps of Niger can be accessed at <http://www.ezilon.com/maps/images/africa/political-map-of-Niger.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/32064>. - Mod.TY]
