The Guardian [edited]<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/haiti-cholera-hurricane-matthew-aid-agencies>Cholera is surging in Haiti after Hurricane Matthew [that made landfall in western Haiti during the morning hours of 4 Oct 2016] fouled wells, flooded rivers and latrines and forced survivors to drink contaminated storm water -- even in regions that have received some deliveries of emergency aid. Less than 2 weeks after the earthquake, at least 200 suspected new cases of cholera have been detected in the country, according to WHO, which is sending 1 million cholera vaccines to Haiti at the end of this week. Aid agencies fear that without a major effort by the international community, survivors of the storm will face a fresh outbreak of the disease.""There will be many more cases of cholera, and unnecessary deaths, all across areas affected by the hurricane if large-scale cholera treatment and prevention response doesn't reach them immediately,"" said Conor Shapiro, president and chief executive officer of the St Boniface Haiti Foundation, which operates a hospital in the southern part of Haiti. And if access to food, water, and shelter does not improve immediately, the death toll is expected to increase. In its wake, the hurricane left pools of stagnant water, overflowing rivers and dead bodies -- creating a breeding ground for the waterborne disease.In the worst-hit regions, efforts to deliver water treatment equipment have been hampered by debris that still blocks roads. And even those places that have received support have reported ""huge"" shortages of clean drinking water, forcing people to drink stormwater, said Beatrice Lindstrom, staff attorney at the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti (IJDH). ""It's a race against time,"" she said.More than 9200 people have since died from cholera and more than 769 000 have been treated in hospitals for the disease -- and Lindstrom said that the hurricane has prompted fears of a fresh epidemic. ""In the 1st month after cholera broke out, after the earthquake, a thousand people were impacted,"" said Lindstrom. ""We're really afraid that the same thing will happen in this situation -- it just seems like access to water is already so, so limited.""Those seeking treatment for the disease must confront a depleted healthcare system -- a quarter of Haiti's healthcare facilities, including cholera treatment centers, have been destroyed.""What Matthew didn't kill, cholera and infections are going to. Infections are coming in,"" said the Haitian Health Foundation country director, Nadesha Mijoba, speaking from J̩r̩mie, a city of 30 000 that was hit by the full force of the category 4 hurricane. The foundation serves J̩r̩mie and 105 nearby mountain villages and is sending weekly food dispatches to 15 local orphanages, which have no refrigeration or storage. Of the foundation's 184 staff members, 130 were made homeless by the hurricane.""The situation was not easy after the earthquake, and with Hurricane Matthew, the situation has become more critical,"" said Marie Th̩r̬se Fr̩d̩rique Jean Pierre, the Haiti director for children's humanitarian group, Plan International. In some places, 80 per cent of the roofs have been lost, and 100 per cent of the crops -- which are grown primarily to feed the people who harvest them -- have been destroyed. ""The devastation will have a direct consequence on the population [and] will increase the malnutrition problems, mainly for children,"" said Jean Pierre.""I'm not afraid to say it, but in another 3, 4 months, Haitians are going to die of starvation,"" Emmanuel Valcourt, a farmer in the south, told the Miami Herald. ""I really don't see how we're going to rebuild. We don't have the financial means. We don't have a job that would have allowed us to have savings. The few animals that we had are all dead.""Jean-Luc Poncelet, a WHO representative in Haiti, said crop destruction in Haiti is particularly devastating because the food is grown by people to feed themselves. ""That [food] has been washed away either by floods, and landslides and winds,"" said Poncelet.He said that since only 10 per cent of the country's population was affected by the hurricane, recovery efforts and resources should be channeled through the country's remaining population and institutions. ""Channeling through institutions that exist in the country would be the most efficient,"" Poncelet said.[byline: Amanda Holpuch]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Just how large the bump in cholera cases will be is yet to be determined. - Mod.LLAn interactive map of the cholera situation in Haiti is available from HealthMap at <http://www.healthmap.org/haiti/>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
