WHO Emergencies Preparedness, Response [edited]<http://www.who.int/csr/don/2016_10_13/en/>On 6 Sep 2016, Ministry of Health staff from Haute-Kotto health district alerted the central level of suspected monkeypox cases admitted at Ira Banda health centre. The index case was a hunter who fell ill on 17 Aug [2016] and died in his village without specimens being collected for laboratory testing. Between 4 Sep and 7 Oct [2016], 26 cases have been admitted and of these, 3 have been laboratory confirmed for monkeypox. Epidemiological investigations are currently on-going to evaluate the magnitude of the outbreak.Public health response:- strengthening public health surveillance for possible cases;- training healthcare workers on using personal protective equipment, and advocating proper hand hygiene and cleaning procedures in the health care setting;- installing 2 isolation units for case management;- provision of free care for patients affected with monkeypox;- increasing public awareness to take precautionary measure to prevent monkeypox transmission;- engaging International Medical Corps and the Catholic Organisation for Relief and Development Aid (CORDAID) to support case management and prevention measures.WHO risk assessmentSmall scale monkeypox outbreaks regularly occur in tropical Africa. Monkeypox is usually transmitted to humans through contact with an infected animal or through infected animal bites. Person-to-person transmission can also occur during outbreaks through close contact with patients but there is no evidence to date that person-to-person transmission alone can sustain monkeypox transmission in humans.Given the lack of adequately equipped isolation units in healthcare facilities in the area and the known transmission dynamics of monkeypox between humans, WHO encourages individuals and healthcare workers to follow infection prevention and control procedures when caring for patients, to prevent transmission of disease.Given the location of the outbreak in a relatively remote and sparsely populated area at this stage the risk of international spread seems limited.WHO does not recommend any restriction for travel and trade to Central African Republic based on available information at this point in time.--communicated by:ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp[A previous ProMED-mail report on 28 Sep 2016 indicated that there were human monkeypox cases in both Basse-Kotto and Haute-Kotto health districts. The above WHO report only mentions the Haute-Kotto district. The number of cases continues to increase.Monkeypox cases are reported sporadically in the Central African Republic (CAR). This is a summary of the 2nd reported outbreak this year (2016). There have been human cases of monkeypox virus infection reported previously in the CAR. As noted in the comment in a previous ProMED-mail post (archive no. 20160119.3947756), Dr Mirdad Kazanji, director of the Institut Pasteur at Bangui, indicated that the phylogenetic tree showed that a 2010 monkeypox isolate was identical to the Democratic Republic of the Congo strain circulating in central Africa. This reported strain was identical to one associated with an outbreak of monkeypox in 2001 in a Bantu family living on the border between the CAR and the DRC, 480 km (about 300 miles) from the 2010 cases.It would be of interest to know to which clade the current monkeypox virus belongs, and which wild animals are the reservoirs in the Central African Republic. Given the human fatalities, one would assume that the monkeypox virus responsible in the current outbreak is the Central African one that occurs in the DR Congo.The virus is seldom transmitted directly from one person to another, but there is a documented instance in the Republic of the Congo. Monkeys are not the reservoirs of the virus, despite the name that the virus has received. Although not determined, the main reservoirs of monkeypox are suspected to be rodents, including rope squirrels (_Funisciurus_ sp; an arboreal rodent) and terrestrial rodents in the genera _Cricetomys_ and _Graphiurus_.Maps of the Central African Republic can be seen at <http://www.africa.upenn.edu/CIA_Maps/Central_African_19865.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/34467>. - Mod.TY]
