CDC Newsroom [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2016/p1013-contaminated-devices-.html>The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is warning healthcare providers and patients about the potential risk of infection from certain devices used during open-heart (open-chest) surgery.Patients who have had open heart surgery should seek medical care if they are experiencing symptoms associated with infections, such as night sweats, muscle aches, weight loss, fatigue, or unexplained fever. This advice follows new information indicating that some LivaNova PLC (formerly Sorin Group Deutschland GmbH) StÌ¦ckert 3T heater-cooler devices, used during many of these surgeries, might have been contaminated during manufacturing which could put patients at risk for life-threatening infections.More than 250 000 heart bypass procedures using heater-cooler devices are performed in the United States every year. Heater-cooler units are an essential part of these life-saving surgeries because they help keep a patient's circulating blood and organs at a specific temperature during the procedure. About 60 per cent of heart bypass procedures performed in the US utilize the devices that have been associated with these infections. CDC estimates that in hospitals where at least one infection has been identified, the risk of a patient getting an infection from the bacteria was between about 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000. While these infections can be severe, and some patients in this investigation have died, it is unclear whether the infection was a direct cause of death. Available information suggests that patients who had valves or prosthetic products implanted are at higher risk of these infections.CDC also released today a Health Alert Network advisory notice [item 2 below] to help hospitals and healthcare providers identify and inform patients who might have been put at risk.""It's important for clinicians and their patients to be aware of this risk so that patients can be evaluated and treated quickly,"" said Michael Bell, MD, deputy director of CDC's Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion. ""Hospitals should check to see which type of heater-coolers are in use, ensure that they're maintained according to the latest manufacturer instructions, and alert affected patients and the clinicians who care for them.""CDC and the US Food and Drug Administration initially published information and alerts about these potentially contaminated heater-cooler devices in 2015. CDC's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, published today, details recently completed laboratory tests by CDC and National Jewish Health that show bacteria from the 3T heater-cooler devices match bacteria found in patients in several states. These results build on previous evidence from Europe that suggests the bacteria contaminated these devices during manufacturing in Germany.The bacteria, _Mycobacterium chimaera_, is a species of nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) often found in soil and water. In the environment, _M. chimaera_ rarely makes healthy people sick. Patients who have been exposed to the bacteria through open-heart surgery can develop general and nonspecific symptoms that can often take months to develop. As a result, diagnosis of these infections can be missed or delayed, sometimes for years, making these infections more difficult to treat. There is no test to determine whether a person has been exposed to the bacteria. Infections can be diagnosed by detecting the bacteria by laboratory culture; the slow growing nature of the bacteria can require up to two months to rule out infection.CDC will continue to work with the FDA and the clinical community to further evaluate and reduce the risk associated with these devices, as well as increase provider and patient awareness. Patients who have had open-heart surgery and are concerned about symptoms they may be experiencing should contact their healthcare providers. Clinicians or patients with questions should contact CDC Info at 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) or <https://wwwn.cdc.gov/dcs/ContactUs/Form>.CDC's website: <https://www.cdc.gov/HAI/outbreaks/heater-cooler.html>FDA's website: <http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/ProductsandMedicalProcedures/CardiovascularDevices/Heater-CoolerDevices/ucm20082725.htm>******[2]Date: Thu 13 Oct 2016Source: CDC Health Alert Network/Emergency Preparedness and Response [edited]<https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/han00397.asp>Summary-------The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is advising hospitals to notify patients who underwent open-heart (open-chest) surgery involving a StÌ¦ckert 3T heater-cooler that the device was potentially contaminated, possibly putting patients at risk for a life threatening infection. New information indicates that these devices, manufactured by LivaNova PLC (formerly Sorin Group Deutschland GmbH), were likely contaminated with the rare bacteria _Mycobacterium chimaera_ during manufacturing. Hospitals should advise potentially exposed patients to seek medical care if they are experiencing symptoms such as night sweats, muscle aches, unexplained weight loss, fatigue, or unexplained fever. In addition, hospitals that use or have used this device are strongly encouraged to make and execute a plan to communicate with potentially exposed patients and to increase awareness among healthcare providers.Background----------In the spring of 2015, investigators in Switzerland reported a cluster of 6 patients with invasive infection of _M. chimaera_, a species of nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) commonly found in soil and water. The infected patients had undergone open-heart surgery that used contaminated heater-cooler devices during extracorporeal circulation (1). In July 2015, a Pennsylvania hospital also identified a cluster of invasive NTM infections among patients who had undergone open-heart surgery. CDC assisted in a field investigation that used both epidemiologic and laboratory evidence to identify an association between invasive _Mycobacterium avium_ complex (including _M. chimaera_) infections and exposure to contaminated 3T heater-cooler devices, consistent with the Swiss report (2).The water circuits in these heater-cooler devices that are used to regulate temperature during cardiopulmonary bypass do not come into direct contact with the patient's circulating blood; however, these reports suggest that _M. chimaera_ can be aerosolized by the devices and result in infections (1,2). The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and CDC have issued alerts about the need to follow updated manufacturer's instructions for maintenance and use of the devices, evaluate the devices for contamination, remain vigilant for new infections, and continue to monitor reports from the United States and overseas (2).CDC in collaboration with National Jewish Health completed a whole-genome sequencing analysis and results demonstrate that _M. chimaera_ isolates from patients with heater-cooler associated infections and from the 3T heater-cooler devices from several US hospitals (in Pennsylvania and Iowa) are all highly related to each other (3). This evidence for likely point-source contamination of the 3T heater-cooler devices is consistent with recent reports from Europe (<http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/ucm504213.htm>) that describe matching of _M. chimaera_ sequences from environmental isolates at the device production site in Germany and isolates from patients and devices in Europe.More than 250 000 heart bypass procedures using heater-cooler devices are performed in the United States every year; the 3T heater-cooler device linked to these infections represents about 60 percent of the heater-cooler devices in the country (2,4). In hospitals where at least one infection has been identified, the risk of infection was between about 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 patients. Initial information suggests that patients who had prosthetic material implanted are at highest risk for NTM infections. These infections are difficult to treat and delays in diagnosis further complicate patients' clinical management. Therefore, it is imperative that patients and providers are informed about the risk of infection associated with use of the 3T device and the need for appropriate diagnostic evaluation to facilitate timely diagnosis and treatment.[Recommendations and references are available at the source URL.]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3]Date: Thu 13 Oct 2016Source: US Food and Drug Administration Medical Devices [edited]<http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/UCM520191.htm>Update: _Mycobacterium chimaera_ infections associated with LivaNova PLC (formerly Sorin Group Deutschland GmbH) Stî¤ckert 3T heater-cooler system: FDA safety communication---------------------------------------------------------------------Updated recommendations for health care facilities and staff:If your facility uses 3T devices, you should:- immediately remove from service any heater-cooler devices, accessories, tubing, and connectors that have tested positive for _M. chimaera_ or have been associated with known _M. chimaera_ patient infections at your facility;- use new accessories, tubing, and connectors to prevent recontamination when using a different heater-cooler device;- direct and channel the heater-cooler exhaust away from the patient -- for example, to the operating room exhaust vent;- be aware that device contamination also may occur from other sources such as environmental contamination or device contact with contaminated accessories;- review the recommendations in CDC's health advisory [notice];- be aware that heater-cooler devices are important in patient care. In appropriately selected patients, the benefits of temperature control during open chest cardiothoracic procedures generally outweigh the risk of infection transmission associated with the use of these devices.If your facility has 3T devices manufactured prior to September 2014 [the FDA is not aware of _M. chimaera_ patient infections associated with 3T devices that were manufactured after September 2014], you should:- strongly consider transitioning away from the use of these devices for open-chest cardiac surgery until the manufacturer has implemented strategies for these devices to mitigate the risks of patient infection;- use of these devices should be limited to emergent and/or life-threatening situations if no other heater-cooler devices are available;- follow the FDA's earlier recommendations to help mitigate the risks of patient infection;- be aware that testing of heater-cooler devices to identify units contaminated with _M. chimaera_ presents technical challenges related to sample collection, the long culture time, and the high rate of false-negative tests. Therefore, it is not recommended at this time.If your facility has 3T devices manufactured after September 2014, you should:- follow the FDA's earlier recommendations to help mitigate the risks of patient infection;- be aware that testing of heater-cooler devices to identify units contaminated with _M. chimaera_ presents technical challenges related to sample collection, the long culture time, and the high rate of false negative tests. Therefore, it is not recommended at this time.The FDA recommends facilities and staff using heater-cooler units CONTINUE to implement the following measures to help reduce risk to patients:- strictly adhere to the cleaning and disinfection instructions provided in the manufacturer's device labeling. Ensure you have the most current version of the manufacturers' instructions for use readily available to promote adherence;- do not use tap water to rinse, fill, refill or top-off water tanks since this may introduce NTM organisms. Use only sterile water or water that has been passed through a filter of less than or equal to 0.22 microns. When making ice needed for patient cooling during surgical procedures use only sterile water or water that has been passed through a filter of less than or equal to 0.22 microns. Deionized water and sterile water created through reverse osmosis is not recommended because it may promote corrosion of the metal components of the system;- direct the heater-cooler's vent exhaust away from the surgical field to mitigate the risk of aerosolizing heater-cooler tank water into the sterile field and exposing the patient;- establish regular cleaning, disinfection and maintenance schedules for heater-cooler devices according to the manufacturers' instructions to minimize the risk of bacterial growth and subsequent patient infection;- develop and follow a comprehensive quality control program for maintenance, cleaning, and disinfection of heater-cooler devices. Your program may include written procedures for monitoring adherence to the program and documenting set up, cleaning, and disinfection processes before and after use;- immediately remove from service heater-cooler devices that show discoloration or cloudiness in the fluid lines/circuits, which may indicate bacterial growth. Consult your hospital infection control officials to perform the appropriate follow up measures and report events of device contamination to the manufacturer and to the FDA via MedWatch;- consider performing environmental, air, and water sampling and monitoring if heater-cooler contamination is suspected. Environmental monitoring requires specialized expertise and equipment to collect and process samples, which may not be feasible in all facilities;- health care facilities should follow their internal procedures for notifying and culturing patients if they suspect infection associated with heater-cooler devices;- submit a report to the manufacturer and to the FDA via MedWatch, if you suspect heater-cooler devices have been associated with patient infections.[Summary of problem and scope, recommendations for patients, FDA activities, reporting problems to the FDA, additional resources, and additional resources can be found at the source URL.]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The CDC statements above say that evidence suggests _Mycobacterium chimaera_, a nontuberculous slow growing mycobacterium, contaminated LivaNova PLC (formerly Sorin Group Deutschland GmbH) StÌ¦ckert 3T heater-cooler devices during manufacturing in Germany. About 60 per cent of heart bypass procedures performed in the US utilize the devices that have been associated with these infections. The water circuits in these heater-cooler devices are used to regulate temperature during cardiopulmonary bypass.The water circuits do not come into direct contact with the patient's circulating blood; rather, _M. chimaera_ was aerosolized by the devices in the operating rooms and resulted in endocarditis, vascular graft infection, sternal wound infection, bacteremia and disseminated infection, vertebral osteomyelitis, and cerebral abscesses. Latency between surgery and manifest infection was measured in years. The risk of mycobacterial infection was low, estimated to be 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 in hospitals where at least one infection has been identified and was highest in patients who had valves or prosthetic products implanted at the time of surgery.CDC recommends that, since the overall risk of _M. chimaera_ infection is low relative to other complications following cardiac surgery, emergent cardiac procedures should not be delayed because of the use of 3T heater-cooler devices, but continued use of 3T devices should be done in accordance with the latest manufacturer's recommendations, including maintenance and proper positioning of devices to minimize the risk of patient exposure. Please see the updated FDA recommendations for use of the LivaNova PLC (formerly Sorin Group Deutschland GmbH) Stî¤ckert 3T Heater-Cooler System in item 3 above. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
