NBC 5 Dallas-Fort Worth [edited]<http://www.nbcdfw.com/news/local/Mysterious-Polio-Like-Illness-Affecting-North-Texas-Children-397040221.html>Acute flaccid myelitis -- possibly linked to EV-D68---------------------------------------------------Scientists from coast to coast are studying an increase in cases of a polio-like illness in children. As of August [2016], at least 50 people in 24 states were confirmed to have acute flaccid myelitis (AFM), a viral illness that targets the body's nervous system and can lead to paralysis and death. 11 of those cases are in Texas and at least 5 of them are in North Texas, according to doctors.Infection with AFM leads to the limb weakness and paralysis. Other symptoms include drooping eyelids, facial weakness and slurred speech, breathing problems, gastrointestinal infections and difficulty swallowing.""The similarities to polio are frightening and real,"" said Dr Benjamin Greenberg, pediatric neurologist at Children's Health and associate professor at UT [University of Texas] Southwestern Medical Center. ""What we see in children today is quite similar to what we saw in polio going back over 100 years,"" Greenberg said.Doctors are troubled by the increase in cases this year. ""We think we are going to see more cases. We don't know how many. When we look to 2014, we saw a spike in cases, going through July, August and September. Then, as it got to October, November, December, the cases declined, but we hope we are on the tail end."" Greenberg says the suspected cause of the condition is a virus called enterovirus-D68.""We think this is triggered by a virus, specifically something called the enterovirus-D68 sub type, but there's a lot of debate on proving causation. In 2014, there was a large outbreak nationwide. We saw 120 kids or more nationwide come down with this paralytic conditions,"" Greenberg said. ""Not all kids recover and we are still looking at ways to improve those outcomes in any way possible. There's nationwide study trying to understand why some people get this condition and others don't, and of those who get it, why it's severe or mild,"" he adds.Enterovirus-D68 is transmitted through casual contact and doctors say the best prevention is proper hygiene, like washing hands and avoiding contact with others while sick. It's still not clear, however, whether the virus was the definite cause of AFM in 10 year old FD, of Frisco [Texas]. She went to bed one Saturday night in July [2016] with a strange pain in her left hand. ""It was stinging, so I thought I might have just injured it. I thought I needed a good night sleep,"" she said. By Sunday morning, she wasn't able to move her legs, in addition to her left hand. Her parents say they knew right away they needed to take FD to the emergency room.""Her telling us, 'I can't walk, my legs feel funny,' and of course, her hands were still in a closed abnormal position,"" said Mr D, as he described the point they decided FD needed medical attention. They took her to Children's Medical Center of Dallas, where doctors had treated several cases like hers before. They gave her therapies to ""dampen down the immune system"" in her spinal cord, which was inflamed, according to Dr Greenberg, who says there is no FDA [US Food and Drug Administration] approved treatment therapies for AFM. FD recovered function of legs but still needs occupational therapy to regain full function of her left hand...Both the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Texas Department of Health and Human Services have issued warnings about the uptick in AFM cases and are asking doctors to report any suspected cases to them as soon as possible.Doctors at UT Southwestern and Children's Health are the lead site of an international study on myelitis.They say if your child develops any kind of weakness in the arms or legs, you should get him or her to the pediatrician right away. ""The likelihood is they will never become paralyzed. This is an extremely rare event. If you ever have a child develop weakness of any kind, weakness of arm or leg, it is very important to seek medical care with pediatrician,"" Greenberg said.[byline: Bianca Castro]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is an inflammation of the spinal cord and generally presents with unique clinical and MRI features. AFM abnormalities noted on MRI are predominantly found in the gray matter of the spinal cord. In 2013, an outbreak of what is now believed to be [AFM] occurred in California and more cases were reported in the summer and fall of 2014 across the United States. The enterovirus (EV-D68) has been suspected in many of these cases; however, it has not been definitively proven that it is this particular virus that has caused the paralysis,(1) although several cases of AFM occurred at around the same time as an outbreak of the EV-D68 virus.(2)There are no conclusive studies that identify the actual numbers of individuals specifically affected by AFM, but from August 2014 to July 2015, CDC verified 120 reports of children in 34 states who developed AFM, but CDC does not include individuals over the age of 22 in their numbers or patients affected prior to August 2014.(1) There have been reports of AFM in both children and adults,(2) but recent cases have primarily affected children under the age of 18.(3)1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Summary of findings: investigation of acute flaccid myelitis in US children, 2014-15. <http://www.cdc.gov/ncird/investigation/viral/2014-15/investigation.html>. 21 Aug 2015. Accessed 9 Sep 2015.2. Greninger AL, Naccache SN, Messacar K et al. A novel outbreak enterovirus D68 strain associated with acute flaccid myelitis cases in the USA (2012-14): a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015;15:671-82.3. Sejvar JJ, Pastula DM, Cortese MM et al. Acute flaccid myelitis: interim considerations for clinical management. <http://www.cdc.gov/ncird/downloads/acute-flaccid-myelitis.pdf>. Updated 4 Nov 2014. Accessed 9 Sep 2015.The predominant presentation is weakness that may affect the limbs, face, oral or eye muscle. Weakness varies greatly ranging from subtle to very severe. AFM may result in total paralysis, partial paralysis, or weakness of just one limb. The combination of paralysis and how individuals present are widely variable. The limbs or muscle structures of individuals with AFM appear weak, flaccid, or limp and are not spastic as seen in classic cases of transverse myelitis. Since it is markedly the gray matter of the spinal cord that is inflamed in individuals with AFM, sensory, bowel and bladder functions can remain intact, however there are individuals that have both upper and lower motor neuron involvement.Excerpted from <https://myelitis.org/living-with-myelitis/disease-information/afm/>A number of different viruses are believed to trigger AFM, including enteroviruses (e.g., poliovirus), adenoviruses and the flavivirus, West Nile virus. The etiologic agent in this current outbreak is not known, although enterovirus-D68 is suspected. Environmental causes have also been suspected in some cases. It also isn't clear what precipitates AFM in some children and not others.See ProMED-mail. Acute flaccid myelitis - North America (03): USA 20161008.4545994 for further discussion of the current outbreak in the US. - Mod.LKA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>]
