Am J Trop Med Hyg. doi:10.4269/ajtmh.16-0401 [edited]<http://www.ajtmh.org/content/early/2016/10/06/ajtmh.16-0401>Kevin Jean, Christl A Donnelly, Neil Ferguson, Tini Garske. A meta-analysis of serological response associated with yellow fever vaccination.------------------------------------------------------------------AbstractDespite previous evidence of high level of efficacy, no synthetic metric of yellow fever (YF) vaccine efficacy is currently available. Based on the studies identified in a recent systematic review, we conducted a random-effects meta-analysis of the serological response associated with YF vaccination. 11 studies conducted between 1965 and 2011 representing 4868 individual observations were included in the meta-analysis. The pooled estimate of serological response was 97.5 per cent (95 per cent confidence interval [CI] = 82.9-99.7 per cent). There was evidence of between-study heterogeneity (I2 = 89.1 per cent), but this heterogeneity did not appear to be related to study size, study design, seroconversion measurement, or definition. Pooled estimates were significantly higher (P less than 0.0001) among studies conducted in nonendemic settings (98.9 per cent, CI = 98.2-99.4 per cent) than among those conducted in endemic settings (94.2 per cent, CI = 83.8-98.1 per cent). These results provide background information against which to evaluate the efficacy of fractional doses of YF vaccine that may be used in outbreak situations.--communicated by:Kevin JeanMRC Center Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology Imperial College London, UK[ProMED-mail thanks Kevin Jean for sending in this report. It is helpful to have a recent update on YF vaccine efficacy. - Mod.TY]******[2] Vaccine associated viscerotropic diseaseDate: Wed 12 Oct 2016Source: Dove Press, Vol 10: 3345-3353 [edited]<https://www.dovepress.com/yellow-fever-vaccine-associated-viscerotropic-disease-current-perspect-peer-reviewed-article-DDDT>R E Thomas. Yellow fever vaccine-associated viscerotropic disease: current perspectives.------------------------------------------------------------------[Abstract]Purpose: To assess those published cases of yellow fever (YF) vaccine-associated viscerotropic disease that meet the Brighton Collaboration criteria and to assess the safety of YF vaccine with respect to viscerotropic disease.Literature search: 10 electronic databases were searched with no restriction of date or language and reference lists of retrieved articles.Methods: All abstracts and titles were independently read by 2 reviewers and data independently entered by 2 reviewers.Results: All serious adverse events that met the Brighton Classification criteria were associated with 1st YF vaccinations. 62 published cases (35 died) met the Brighton Collaboration viscerotropic criteria, with 32 from the US, 6 from Brazil, 5 from Peru, 3 from Spain, 2 from the People's Republic of China, one each from Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Ecuador, France, Germany, Ireland, New Zealand, Portugal, and the UK, and 4 with no country stated. 2 cases met both the viscerotropic and YF vaccine-associated neurologic disease criteria. 70 cases proposed by authors as viscerotropic disease did not meet any Brighton Collaboration viscerotropic level of diagnostic certainty or any YF vaccine-associated viscerotropic disease causality criteria (37 died).Conclusion: Viscerotropic disease is rare in the published literature and in pharmacovigilance databases. All published cases were from developing countries. Because the symptoms are usually very severe and life threatening, it is unlikely that cases would not come to medical attention (but might not be published). Because viscerotropic disease has a highly predictable pathologic course, it is likely that viscerotropic disease post-YF vaccine occurs in low-income countries with the same incidence as in developing countries. YF vaccine is a very safe vaccine that likely confers lifelong immunity.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is helpful to have an updated evaluation of YF vaccine safety and the occurrence of viscerotropic post-vaccinal disease (YEL-AVD). Even though the risk of severe disease resulting from YF vaccination is extremely small, public fear can lead to individuals refusing the vaccine. Fortunately, this fear did not appear to be a complication in the current vaccination campaigns in Angola or the DR Congo. RJ Seligman commented (ProMED-mail archive no. 20161009.4547176), ""it has been stated that suspicion of yellow fever was ruled out because the patients had been vaccinated. It is certainly true that many causes of illness mimicking yellow fever exist. One of these is the rare occurrence of reactions to the vaccine itself. Such cases have been labeled yellow fever vaccine-associated viscerotropic disease (YEL-AVD) (Seligman SJ. Risk groups for yellow fever vaccine-associated viscerotropic disease (YEL-AVD). Vaccine 2014;32:5769-75). No cases of YEL-AVD have been laboratory-confirmed in Africa. All of the laboratory-confirmed cases of YEL-AVD have occurred either in South America or in prospective travelers. One knows that responding to an ongoing yellow fever epidemic with mass vaccination campaigns and with mosquito control measures is extremely challenging. However, if cases mimicking yellow fever occur in vaccinated persons, specimens should be sent for viral culture and tissue preserved by freezing. If the virus turns out to be vaccine-like rather than yellow fever, the diagnosis of YEL-AVD is confirmed and tissue sent for study to see if there is a genetic immune defect that predisposes to YEL-AVD (Seligman SJ, Casanova JL. Yellow fever vaccine: worthy friend or stealthy foe? Expert Rev Vaccines 2016;15:681-91)."" During the YF outbreak in Uganda this year (2016) there was concern about vaccine administration to HIV immunocompromised individuals and there was one YF vaccine associated death reported, but apparently without laboratory confirmation.YEL-AVD cases are not the only concern. A 4 Jul 2016 study (ProMED-mail archive no. 20160704.4325545) reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System from 2007 through 2013 indicated that there were 938 adverse events (SAEs including anaphylaxis, YF vaccine-associated neurologic disease (YEL-AND) and YF vaccine-associated viscerotropic disease (YEL-AVD) following YF vaccination. Of these, 84 (9 per cent) were classified as SAEs for a rate of 3.8 per 100 000 doses distributed. Reporting rates of SAEs increased with increasing age, with a rate of 6.5 per 100 000 in persons aged 60-69 years and 10.3 in persons 70 years or older. The reporting rate for anaphylaxis was 1.3 per 100 000 doses distributed and was highest in persons 18 years or older (2.7 per 100 000). Reporting rates of YEL-AND and YEL-AVD were 0.8 and 0.3 per 100 000 doses distributed, respectively; both rates increased with increasing age.The YF vaccine in use currently is a very safe one. The risk of death due to YF itself during an outbreak is considerably higher than the risk of adverse vaccine effects. - Mod.TY]
