Gizmodo [edited]<http://gizmodo.com/hospital-ward-gripped-by-mysterious-hallucinations-quar-1787866693>This week, an emergency room in the Pacific Northwest was briefly quarantined after 5 people -- including 2 police officers and a hospital worker -- experienced mysterious hallucinations from an unidentified illness believed to be spread by touch.According to Oregon Live, the enigmatic incident began early Wednesday [12 Oct 2016?] morning when a 54-year-old caregiver in North Bend, Oregon called police to report 7-8 people ""trying to take the roof off her vehicle."" Police say they found nothing, but after the caregiver reported the unseen vandals a 2nd time, sheriff's deputies escorted her to a nearby hospital for suspected hallucinations.Shortly afterward, however, one of the deputies began experiencing similar symptoms and returned to the hospital. Soon after that, the other deputy, a hospital worker and the caregiver's 78-year-old patient also began hallucinating and were hospitalized.A hazmat team was subsequently deployed to both the hospital and the initial residence but was unable to locate a common source of contamination. Blood tests also failed to find anything unusual.According to police spokesperson Patrick Downing, initial investigations suggested the 78-year-old patient's narcotic fentanyl patches could be the source of the hallucinations, but that explanation was later ruled out.""Investigation has found that all those patches and potential medications that may have caused the symptoms have been accounted for,"" Downing told KVAL News. ""The vehicles, equipment, and uniforms have been checked, with no contaminates identified or located on or about them.""Authorities say the investigation is ongoing.[Byline: Hudson Hongo]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Tactile hallucinations have been associated with a number of disease/syndromes for quite some time. Amputees often have phantom limb sensations. Parkinson's disease, Ekbom's syndrome (delusional parasitosis), and schizophrenia sufferers have report tactile hallucinations. However, this seems to be a transmitted tactile hallucination. Presently the fentyl patch on one of the individuals has been ruled out. For a patch of this nature to produce this syndrome would seem to require more than a momentary brushing with the patch and generally only one side of the patch can transmit the drug, so another factor in ruling out the patch.While this particular situation seems to be transmitted by touch it does not fit the definition of tactile hallucinations. It is only tactile in the sense it appears to spread through touch. The article notes that ""a caregiver in North Bend, Oregon, called police to report 7 or 8 people 'trying to take the roof off her vehicle.' "" This is a real hallucination. However, the article continues, ""Shortly afterward, however, one of the deputies began experiencing similar symptoms and returned to the hospital."" Therefore, this is appears to be a transmissible hallucination. Whether it is a substance that all individuals with hallucinations came in contact with or whether it is something being inhaled, either in the house, or in the area, has not been determined yet.This particular situation seems quite baffling. Hopefully, investigators will figure this one out. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/56172>.].................................................sb/tg/msp/mj/ml"
