The Daily Mail [edited]<http://dailym.ai/2df0DFy>Children are at risk from an outbreak of a killer virus similar to polio that can paralyse its victims. Clusters of children across Britain have fallen victim to enterovirus D68, which is spread easily through coughs and sneezes. The previously rare bug, which experts say is on the rise, has no anti-viral cure or vaccine.It has been linked to cases of very young children being left unable to walk. Paralysis can strike within days and leaves the worst affected fighting to breathe or swallow.It is understood 4 young victims are in hospital in Edinburgh, with a boy and primary-aged girl in intensive care for more than a month. All 4 appeared to have lost use of their limbs.The presence of a 'small number' of patients has been confirmed [38 confirmed cases] by officials. The clusters of cases are small, but Public Health England has published a risk assessment stating the virus is associated with 'polio-like' neurological symptoms.Last year only 14 cases of EV-D68 were detected in the UK, but there have been 38 laboratory-confirmed infections so far this year [2016]. The majority of patients have been admitted to hospital with respiratory problems, with some suffering neurological issues.While doctors have been notified, affected families fear too little has been done to alert the public. A source close to the outbreak said: 'There's a real concern that the spread of this virus isn't being made public. GPs need to know that this virus is out there so they can recognise symptoms and make quick referrals.'The symptoms seem to start with a sore throat but within a day or so they are left unable to breathe as their muscles stop working and they become floppy. It's a terrifying disease that leaves a lot of the children permanently paralysed. 'The health officials seem to be really keen that this is kept secret but parents and doctors need to know.'Dr Kate Templeton, chairman of NHS [National Health Service] Lothian's incident management team, said: ""We have been investigating a possible cluster of patients infected with enterovirus D68. The patients are all now testing negative for the virus."" NHS Lothian also denied that families had been asked not to publicise the disease.Fears are growing over EV-D68 because of its link to a phenomenon called acute flaccid paralysis which causes patients' muscles to rapidly weaken. If the muscles they need to breathe fail, they can die. Children are more vulnerable because they have not built up immunity to such viruses.Enterovirus causes illnesses including meningitis and polio, which can temporarily paralyse the legs. However the EV-D68 type is a non-polio virus.Experts investigated it after an outbreak in the US killed 14 people and infected 1153 between August 2014 and January 2015. The outbreak in Scotland followed one in Wales over the winter of 2014 and 2015.Public Health England has confirmed the virus is circulating but said cases are in line with expected numbers.Many people who contract the virus only ever have mild cold-like symptoms and do not suffer paralysis.The public are advised to take good hygiene precautions when sneezing/coughing, wash their hands and avoid close contact with people with colds and flu-like illnesses.Tot Woke Up Paralysed---------------------Doctors said 2-year-old RJ may never walk again after falling ill with the virus in January [2016]. The toddler, who had symptoms of a chest infection, woke up one day unable to stand - and is now paralysed from the waist down.His family says he was initially sent home from hospital when doctors were unable to find anything wrong. They later diagnosed EV-D68, and warned that [he] may be in a wheelchair for the rest of his life.[Byline: Victoria Allen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The headline states 38 laboratory-confirmed infections, but within the report, it states, the cases have tested negative for the virus, so it is not clear if the etiologic agent is definitely enterovirus D68, although other reports also state D68 is responsible for these cases.Enterovirus D68 was first identified in California in 1962, the virus is one of 100 non-polio enteroviruses.According to advice from Public Health England, EV-D68 can ""cause mild to severe respiratory illness requiring ventilatory support and has been associated with cases and clusters of polio-like neurological symptoms including paralysis and meningo-encephalitis.""Mild symptoms also include runny nose, sneezing, cough, body aches, and muscle aches; while severe symptoms include respiratory difficulty (wheezing and trouble breathing).The Centre for Disease Control in America says the virus is spread in a similar way to other similar illnesses and the virus can be found 'in an infected person's respiratory secretions, such as saliva, nasal mucus, or sputum.""The virus is believed to spread from person to person when someone who is infected coughs, sneezes, or touches a surface that is then touched by others.Children aged 4 to 12 years old are reported to be most in danger of getting the virus.There is no specific vaccine or treatment for EV-D68, according to Public Health England, and clinical and public health management is the same as for other acute respiratory infections, or unexplained neurological illness.How serious a problem is this in the UK in 2016?-------------------------------------------------------In a risk assessment warning Public Health England said: ""So far in 2016, 38 cases of laboratory confirmed EV-D68 infection have been diagnosed. These cases are scattered across the UK and the majority were during the spring and summer months.""The available information suggests that the majority of these cases is sporadic and have presented with respiratory symptoms resulting in hospital admission. A small number presented with neurological signs and symptoms.""The risk that EV-D68 is circulating in the community largely un-detected is moderate according to the agency, while the risk to public health through failure to detect the virus in symptomatic individuals is reported to be ""very low"".[extracted and edited from <http://bit.ly/2dM1Yj3>]A map of the United Kingdom may be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>. - Mod.LK]
