ABC3340 [edited]<http://abc3340.com/news/local/er-doctors-seeing-more-hepatitis-c-cases-among-injection-drug-users>An alarming trend in local emergency rooms: ER doctors are seeing more cases of hepatitis C among drug users sharing needles. Emergency departments started screening patients 17 and older in 2015. Since that universal screening began, the ER at UAB (University of Alabama Birmingham) hospital started to see more cases among people who inject drugs.""This is an alarming problem,"" said Dr. James Galbraith, an ER doctor at UAB. ""There is a direct correlation between the hepatitis C cases we're identifying in this younger population, and the emerging opioid injection drug use, largely heroin.""ER doctors did not start regularly testing for Hepatitis C until 2013 - once a cure became more readily available. Initially, testing was done on baby boomers, who account for 75 percent of hepatitis C cases in the USA. It was not until 2015 that all patients 17 and older are screened. ""We recognized we were missing a really important population, which was a growing population of people who inject drugs,"" said Galbraith.Since 2015, Galbraith says 12 percent of white patients over that age test positive and 2 percent of African Americans test positive. ""That disparity between the 2 demographics is largely driven by injection drug use. Which we know is disproportionately impacting the white population,"" Galbraith explains.Galbrieth believes these ER visits could end up saving more lives in the process. ""Therefore, we have the opportunity to counsel patients about their positive result in the emergency department and give them their follow up options,"" he said. ""The big opportunity is an opportunity to share information about how this disease is transmitted, and maybe we can avert the spread to others."" Galbrieth adds, ""the concern now is that Alabama could also see the spread of HIV among injection drug users.""[Byline: Edward Burch]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[In the absence of a vaccine, infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/205>.]
