Viet Nam Net [edited]<http://english.vietnamnet.vn/fms/science-it/165411/young-boy-with-rare-whitmore-disease-recovers.html>In late August 2016, a young man from Thanh Hoa province was diagnosed with melioidosis, a disease which can kill patients within 48 hours. The patient was 25 years old. On 11 Aug 2016, he was brought to Bach Mai Hospital in Hanoi with severe sepsis and multiple organ dysfunction. Prior to that, he was hospitalized in Thanh Hoa province with fever and a swollen right knee. The fever did not come down after 11 days of treatment. He was later transferred to Bach Mai Hospital, one of the most prestigious hospitals in Vietnam.The blood tests showed that he tested positive for _Burkholderia pseudomallei_, the bacterium that causes melioidosis. After a month of intensive treatment at Bach Mai, he was transferred to a provincial hospital for continued care and treatment. His condition improved.According to Do Duy Cuong, head of Bach Mai Hospital's Infectious Diseases Ward, Bach Mai has received more than 10 melioidosis (also called Whitmore's disease) so far in 2016. The patients mostly came from the north and central region.Since the clinical pictures were complex, the patients were at first admitted to different wards, from respiration to endocrinology and dermatology before they were treated. Doctors often misdiagnosed the disease. It is necessary to attack the disease with high-dose antimicrobials for at least 2 weeks and then continue using antimicrobials for 3-6 more months. If the patients are not treated with the right therapy, the disease will likely recur.The bacterium exists in soil and the major transmission is skin contact with infected soil or the inhalation of bacteria-harboring particles.[Byline: Thanh Mai]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Melioidosis mainly affects people who have direct contact with contaminated soil and water. Many have an underlying predisposing condition such as diabetes (commonest risk factor), renal disease, cirrhosis, thalassemia, alcohol dependence, immunosuppressive therapy, chronic obstructive lung disease, cystic fibrosis, or excess kava consumption (Kava is an herbal member of the pepper family that can be associated with chronic liver disease). HIV infection, however, does not appear to be a major risk factor for more severe disease. Melioidosis may present at any age, but peaks in the 4th and 5th decades of life, affecting men more than women. In addition, although severe fulminating infection can and does occur in healthy individuals, severe disease and fatalities are much less common in those without risk factors.In acute severe melioidosis, there is characteristically a rapid progression of respiratory failure that is due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and/or pneumonia. It has been suggested that the ARDS to melioidosis sepsis is more rapid in progression than with other bacteria and may be related to the intracellular interactions of the bacillus and the leukocyte. Bacteremia without shock/hypotension has a substantially better prognosis.Derived from: Tolaney P, Lutwick LI. Melioidosis. In: Lutwick LI, Lutwick SM (eds). Bioterror: the weaponization of infectious diseases. Totowa NJ: Humana Press, 2008 pp 145-58. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/56178>.]
