Food Poisoning Bulletin [edited]<https://foodpoisoningbulletin.com/2016/salmonella-javiana-outbreak-in-maricopa-county-az-sickens-50/>Salmonella Javiana Outbreak in Maricopa County AZ Sickens 50------------------------------------------------------------The Maricopa County Department of Public Health has released a PDF report on their investigation into a _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Javiana outbreak that sickened at least 50 people in July and August 2016. There are 40 confirmed cases and 10 probable cases. A total of 33 (66 percent) of the cases reported eating at Restaurant A, with exposure dates from 16 Jul 2016 to 18 Aug 2016. As many as 40 other restaurants or fast food establishments were reportedly patronized by patients. Up to 3 had more than 1 person reporting eating there within the week before illness onset with 2 cases each.Findings from the investigation did not reveal a single source of contamination, but unfried shrimp was suspected as a possible vehicle for contamination based on a case control investigation. Environmental samples were taken. Several pre-portioned, prepped samples of seafood (shrimp and halibut) tested positive for _S._ Javiana. The investigation did not find an unopened source product contaminated with the outbreak strain.The timeline for this outbreak is complicated. On 10 Aug 2016, Maricopa County was notified by the University of Arizona Student Aid for Field Epidemiology Response Team of 2 unique culture-confirmed cases of salmonellosis who reported eating at Restaurant A. Then, an environmental assessment of the restaurant was conducted with no major violations. The restaurant enhanced their sanitizing protocol and performed deep cleaning. On 15 Aug 2016, the Arizona Department of Health Services notified Maricopa County of a cluster of 5 _S._ Javiana cases; 3 ate at Restaurant A. Up to 6 clinical samples on 16 Aug 2016 yielded _S._ Javiana with the same PFGE patterns. On 18 Aug 2016, detailed food information from questionnaires was collected.On 24 Aug 2016, ingredient information was received and compiled. On 25 Aug 25, 6 more cases had PFGE patterns identical or very similar to the outbreak strain. On 26 Aug 2016, food samples were collected from the restaurant, as well as environmental samples. On 30 Aug 2016, the freezer door handle sample and prepped re-packaged halibut samples tested ""presumptive positive"" for Salmonella. All other samples were negative.On 1 Sep 2016, government officials gathered more foods from Restaurant A: 6 types of frozen unopened shrimp boxes, an unopened box of halibut, and 8 different prepped/re-packaged shrimp samples. Also on 1 Sep 2016, contact information for dining companions was gathered for a case control study. On 2 Sep 2016, the freezer door handle and repackaged halibut samples were serotyped as _S._ Javiana. A total of 5 of 6 prepped/re-packaged shrimp samples were presumptive positive for Salmonella. On 3 Sep 2016, an unopened box of frozen U10 shrimp tested positive for Salmonella. Trackback began on the frozen shrimp. On 7 Sep 2016, the freezer door handle environmental sample and the repackaged halibut sample came back as matching the outbreak strain of _S._ Javiana. The frozen unopened box of U10 shrimp were serotyped as _S._ Weltevreden and the 5 re-packaged shrimp were serotyped as _S._ Javiana. The 5 prepped/re-packaged shrimp all match the outbreak PFGE pattern of _S._ Javiana.FDA traced the frozen U10 shrimp on 13 Sep 2016 and started working with the distributor to recall the product. The Maricopa County press release was given to the public since the product was sold to wholesalers instead of retail food establishments, but there was a recall of Censea frozen shrimp issued on 22 Sep 2016 posted on the FDA site. On 14 Sep 2016, officials performed a routine inspection of Restaurant A with no violations. On the 15 Sep 2016, CDC returned the whole genome sequencing (WGS) of the 4 case patient isolates and they were all highly related. This means they likely originated from the same source. The investigation was closed on 3 Oct 2016 with no more reports of illness or complaints. In the investigation analysis, the unfried shrimp was the only food item of ""significance."" The specific source of exposure is ""uncertain"" according to the report.The report states, ""it seems likely that this outbreak resulted from initial contamination of a food product and continued via cross-contamination at the restaurant during food preparation."" It continues, ""the findings of Restaurant A inspections demonstrated that seafood items were cooked according to the Arizona food code, however due to contamination with a high burden of Salmonella, unfried seafood might have been the vehicle of salmonellosis.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[The outbreak isolate was not recovered from the unopened packages of frozen shrimp and only from the ""prepped portions"" and freezer door handle. Although not all the cases were linked to ""Restaurant A"", it is possible also that a food handler was the source along with poor kitchen hygiene. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1411>.]
