La NaciÌ n [in Spanish, trans. Mod.LK, edited]<http://www.nacion.com/nacional/salud-publica/Madre-sufrio-Guillain-Barre-aplicarse-vacuna_0_1591640870.html>AAR, a 28 year-old woman, couldn't lift, breast feed, or change the diapers of her baby, who was born on 9 May [2016]. Her arm muscles had no strength and were wasted. She couldn't walk or stand.Not being able to care for her newborn daughter was one of the hardest things for this woman from Cartago, who is slowly recovering from Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome, which the physicians and the Ministry of Health associated with the administration of influenza vaccine.She is one of a very small number of people who have developed this disease after administration of the vaccine. AAR went for her vaccine on [29 Apr 2016], when she was 38 weeks pregnant. This was one week before she gave birth and 2 weeks before the Social Security of Costa Rica initiated a national vaccination campaign against flu which reached 1.2 million people.According to the Health [Ministry], only this mother has been reported to have suffered from Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome [GBS], an unusual adverse effect of this vaccine, happening less than once or twice in a million.Symptoms: In the case of AAR, 2 days after the vaccination, she started to feel a tingle in her stomach and her feet. The physicians, initially related the symptoms to gestation; nonetheless, the symptoms continued and even worsened after giving birth.""On [12 May 2016], I could no longer walk; the left side of my face was paralyzed, the lips and eyes drooped. We went to the Max Peralta Hospital and they told me it was the flu and we were given acetaminophen.""We arrived home but still felt ill. We saw a private doctor and he told me that these were Guillain-BarrÌ© symptoms. He asked me if I had had a recent vaccine and I told him I did, against flu. He said he had to report the case,"" she said.Guillain-BarrÌ© is an autoimmune disease in which the muscles do not obey orders from the brain. People who suffer from this disease can be left with a temporary paralysis due to the attack on the defenses of the nerve cells.The mother said the vaccine was administered in a pharmacy. When she asked about secondary effects, she was told only that it could cause headache, muscle pain, and flushing of the skin.The private doctor referred AAR to the Calderon Guardia hospital on [12 May 2016]. There, she was diagnosed with the syndrome [GBS] and hospitalized in the neurocritical care unit.The hospital's medical report, of which La NaciÌ n has a copy, indicates AAR received the vaccination and at her arrival she was evaluated in the area of immunology, from where she was referred to [the epidemiology department] for follow up, ""since it is the 1st case of this kind in the current year [2016].""Xiomara Vega, coordinator from the National Center of Pharmacovigilance of the Ministry of Health, explained that her department received the case of AAR and they investigated.""Laboratory tests were performed and the diagnosis was Guillain-BarrÌ© associated with the vaccination; everything pointed to the vaccine. She was given the corresponding treatment,"" said Vega.Every year health authorities carry out vaccination campaigns against influenza and this year they were increased because between December 2015 and February 2016, 31 people died from A(H1N1) influenza in a late peak of acute respiratory infections (ARI).Even though she still has sequelae of Guillain-BarrÌ©, AAR already passed through the toughest part. She went from a wheelchair, to a walker, to a cane, and in July [2016] she could walk normally.""I was able to walk again, to write, to comb my hair, and put on makeup by myself; before I could not do such basic things. I still have a slight paralysis in my face, muscle pain, and cramps. I know what happened to me is not very common but people should know this can happen.""[Byline: Daniela Cerdas E]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder in which a person's own immune system damages their nerve cells, causing muscle weakness and sometimes paralysis. GBS can cause symptoms that usually last for a few weeks. Most people recover fully from GBS, but some people have long-term nerve damage. In very rare cases, people have died of GBS, usually from difficulty breathing. In the United States, for example, an estimated 3000 to 6000 people develop GBS each year on average, whether or not they received a vaccination.What causes GBS?----------------Many things can cause GBS; about 2/3 of people who develop GBS symptoms do so several days or weeks after they have been sick with diarrhea or a respiratory illness. Infection with the bacterium _Campylobacter jejuni_ is one of the most common risk factors for GBS. People also can develop GBS after having the flu or other infections (such as cytomegalovirus and Epstein Barr virus). On very rare occasions, they may develop GBS in the days or weeks after getting a vaccination.Who is at risk for developing GBS?----------------------------------Anyone can develop GBS; however, it is more common among older adults. The incidence of GBS increases with age, and people older than 50 years are at greatest risk for developing GBS. How common is GBS? How common is it among people who have been vaccinated against flu?GBS is rare. Medical events occur regardless of vaccination, and background rates are used to assess vaccine safety by comparing the expected rate of disease or death to the actual or observed rate in any given timeframe. The background rate for GBS in the US is about 80 to 160 cases of GBS each week, regardless of vaccination.What happened in 1976 with GBS and the [influenza A(H1N1) virus] vaccine?----------------------------------------------------------------------In 1976 there was a small increased risk of GBS following vaccination with an influenza vaccine made to protect against an [influenza A(H1N1)] virus. The increased risk was approximately 1 additional case of GBS per 100 000 people who got the [influenza A(H1N1) virus] vaccine. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) conducted a thorough scientific review of this issue in 2003 and concluded that people who received the 1976 [A(H1N1)] influenza vaccine had an increased risk for developing GBS. Scientists have multiple theories on why this increased risk may have occurred, but the exact reason for this association remains unknown.The link between GBS and flu vaccination in other years is unclear, and if there is any risk for GBS after seasonal flu vaccines it is very small, about 1 in a million. Studies suggest that it is more likely that a person will get GBS after getting the flu than after vaccination. It is important to keep in mind that severe illness and death are associated with influenza, and vaccination is the best way to prevent influenza infection and its complications.(excerpted from <http://www.cdc.gov/flu/protect/vaccine/guillainbarre.htm>)Also see: Haber P, DeStefano F, Angulo FJ, et al: Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome following influenza vaccination. JAMA. 2004 Nov 24; 292(20): 2478-81; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15562126>Context. An unexplained increase in the risk of Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome (GBS) occurred among recipients of the [A(H1N1)] influenza vaccine in 1976-1977. Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome remains the most frequent neurological condition reported after influenza vaccination to the Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System (VAERS) since its inception in 1990.Conclusions. From 1990 to 2003, VAERS [Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System] reporting rates of GBS after influenza vaccination decreased. The long onset interval and low prevalence of other preexisting illnesses are consistent with a possible causal association between GBS and influenza vaccine. These findings require additional research, which can lead to a fuller understanding of the causes of GBS and its possible relationship with influenza vaccine.One should note Zika virus was also active in Costa Rica at the time, and this virus has been associated with increased incidence of Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome. It would be interesting to know whether the individual in the report above was tested for Zika infection.Maps of Costa Rica can be seen at <http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/americas/costa_pol87.jpg> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/27780>. - Mod.LK]
