Mesothelioma.com [edited]<http://www.mesothelioma.com/news/2016/10/asbestos-insulation-linked-to-increase-in-australian-mesothelioma-cases.htm>Population Health at the Australian National University in Canberra recently performed a study on malignant mesothelioma cases in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). The ACT has seen an increase in these cases and results show it might be linked to the use of asbestos insulation.According to the World Health Organization (WHO), Australia has the world's highest per capita rate of malignant mesothelioma. The West Cape of Australia is among the places with the highest rates of incidence.However, there's been a sharp increase in the mesothelioma rate in the ACT, and the study showed there might be a link between the quick rise and the use of asbestos insulation. The study sought to compare the ACT's rates with those elsewhere in the country. Data from various cancer registries were used to identify trends and results.The lead study author Rosemary Korda noted, ""Between 1994 and 2011, age- and sex-adjusted mesothelioma rates in the ACT increased over time, on average by 12 percent per 3-year period."" Compared with the rest of Australia, rates in the ACT were lower on average, but increased at a higher rate between 1994 and 2011, with most of the increase from 2009 to 2011.Many homes in the ACT were built with loose-fill asbestos insulation, so domestic exposure is a major concern. In October 2014, an in-principle 1 billion USD deal was struck to finance the purchase and demolition of 1021 Canberra homes that were considered unsafe to live in due to asbestos. These homes were called ""Mr. Fluffy"" homes as they were filled with the deadly loose-fill asbestos insulation. Over 1000 homes were affected from the late 60s into the late 70s when the company went under. This decision was based on tests in many of the homes that found unsafe levels of asbestos in living areas, children's bedding, toys, and clothes. ""The [Asbestos Response] Taskforce made a decision to act on these cases as soon as possible in the best interests of those residents,"" said a taskforce spokesperson.When disturbed or deteriorated, asbestos fibers can become airborne and inhaled through the lungs. According to the Public Health Research & Practice's abstract of the study, inhalation of asbestos fibers is the predominant cause of malignant mesothelioma.Asbestos exposure situations like this may not lead to a disease diagnosis for years to come. Mesothelioma cancer can take decades to be found. Imaging scans and biopsies should be completed to confirm its presence and determine the level and severity.[Byline: Jillian Duff]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Asbestos exposure has been linked to the development of serious respiratory diseases and cancers, including mesothelioma, lung cancer, asbestosis, and other conditions. Asbestos exposure is most commonly related to occupational, environmental and secondhand factors.For nearly 100 years, asbestos was one of the most commonly used materials in industries such as construction, shipbuilding and manufacturing. It wasn't until the mid-20th century that researchers officially established the connection between asbestos exposure and serious respiratory conditions (although evidence was presented as early as the 1920s). But by then, millions of workers had already been exposed in the workplace and in other locations. While federal asbestos exposure limits were imposed in 1972, an estimated 10 000 people in the United States continue to pass away each year from related illnesses.Destruction of these houses can cause great risk to the workers. Extreme precaution needs to be exercised so that fibers are not released upon nearby individuals and neighborhoods.Asbestos is a group of at least related minerals with thin microscopic fibers. Because these fibers are resistant to heat, fire, and chemicals and do not conduct electricity, asbestos has been mined and used widely in the construction, automotive, and other industries.If products containing asbestos are disturbed, the tiny fibers are released into the air. When they are breathed in, they can become trapped in the lungs and stay there for many years. Over time these fibers can accumulate and lead to serious health problems, including:- Asbestosis, an inflammatory condition of lungs that can cause shortness of breath and eventually scarring of the lungs that makes it hard to breathe.- Mesothelioma, a rare cancer that affects the lining of the lungs, chest cavity, or abdomen.- Lung cancer.- Other lung problems, including pleural plaques (changes in the membranes surrounding the lungs), thickening of the membranes that surround the lungs, and pleural effusions (abnormal collections of fluid between the lungs and the inside wall of the chest.Studies have also suggested an association between asbestos exposure and other cancers, including cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, throat, kidney, brain, bladder, voice box, gallbladder, and others. However, the evidence is inconclusive.Asbestos exposure may occur in the workplace, home, or community. Mined and used commercially since the 1800s, asbestos has been used in many products, including: car brake shoes and clutch pads; building materials, including ceiling and floor tiles; paints, coatings, and adhesives; plastics; vermiculite-containing garden products; and some talc-containing crayons. Due to federal regulations and health concerns, asbestos is much less widely used than it was just a few decades ago.Most cases of asbestos poisoning occur in asbestos workers; however, there is some evidence that family members of workers heavily exposed to asbestos face an increased risk of developing mesothelioma, possibly due to the exposure of asbestos fibers brought into the home on the clothing, skin, and hair. Cases of mesothelioma have also been seen in people living close to asbestos mines.Another group at risk of developing asbestos-related disease is workers involved in the Sept. 11, 2001, attack on the World Trade Center in New York City. Asbestos was used in the construction of the North Tower, and hundreds of tons of asbestos were released into the atmosphere during the attack.Several factors are involved in how asbestos exposure affects an individual. These include:- How much asbestos a person was exposed to- How long the person was exposed- The size, shape and chemical makeup of the asbestos fibers- The presence of other lung diseases- Cigarette smoking also increases the risk of problems related to asbestos exposure.There are different forms of asbestos. Although all forms are considered hazardous, different types of asbestos fibers may be associated with different health risks. For example, the results of several studies suggest that amphibole forms (which have longer, more durable fibers) may be more harmful than chrysotile forms (which have curly fibers), particularly for mesothelioma risk, because they tend to stay in the lungs longer.Asbestos cancer and other health problems take many years to develop. Most cases of lung cancer or asbestosis in asbestos workers occur 15 or more years after initial exposure to asbestos. For mesothelioma - cancer of the lining of the lungs - the lag time is even longer. The time between initial asbestos exposure and mesothelioma commonly has been 30 years or more.Asbestos Symptoms-----------------The respiratory tract is the most common site of asbestos exposure symptoms. Symptoms differ depending on the particular problem.The main symptom of asbestosis is shortness of breath. Other symptoms may include:- Persistent cough that produces mucus- Chest tightness- Chest pain- Loss of appetite- Dry, crackling sound in lungs while inhalingSymptoms of lung cancer may include:- Cough (including coughing up blood)- Wheezing- Unexplained weight loss- Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath- Persistent chest pain- Hoarseness- AnemiaThe main symptoms of mesothelioma of the lungs are shortness of breath and chest pain. Symptoms of abdominal mesothelioma can include:- Weight loss- Swelling and pain in the abdomen- Blood clotting abnormalities- Bowel obstruction- Anemia- FeverBecause many conditions share these symptoms, having these symptoms doesn't necessarily mean you have asbestos-related cancer or lung damage. If you experience symptoms, it's important to see your doctor.Diagnosing Asbestos-Related Problems------------------------------------Diagnosing asbestos-related health problems can take some time. The diagnostic process may include any or all of the following.- X-rays of the chest and/or abdomen- Lung function tests- CT scans- MRIPortions of this comment were extracted from:<https://www.asbestos.com/exposure/> and <http://www.webmd.com/lung/asbestos-exposure> - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/290>.].................................................sb/tg/ao/ml"
