Hindustan Times [edited]<http://www.hindustantimes.com/mumbai-news/12-year-old-boy-dies-in-first-case-of-hantavirus-in-mumbai/story-N4t3IBWebqhsnzGegwhcUN.html>A‰Ûä12-year-old boy from Colaba [part of Mumbai city] died of the hantavirus infection on Saturday 15 Oct [2016]. This is the 1st ever case of the infection in Mumbai, said public health officials.Hantavirus infection, known as hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a lung infection caused by viruses found in the saliva, urine, and droppings of rodents. The illness is rare but has a high morbidity and mortality rate.Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) officials confirmed that the child's blood tested positive for the virus after being tested at a local laboratory. They are awaiting test results from the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune.The child, who was admitted to Bhatia Hospital, Tardeo, on 29 Sep [2016], succumbed after his parents discharged him against medical advice. Doctors who treated the child said the case baffled them. ""The child was brought to the hospital with complaints of breathlessness, cough, fever and a dropping platelet count. For the first 5 days, we conducted tests for leptospirosis, dengue and malaria but the results were negative,"" said Dr Aditya Agarwal, chest physician at the hospital.Agarwal said the child was put on antibiotics, but developed severe stomach pain that was diagnosed as abdominal pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas). ""He started coughing up blood from the next day onwards. Within 24 hours, his health deteriorated to the point where we had to put him on a ventilator,"" said Agarwal.The child began bleeding profusely from both lungs. ""We kept running tests for vector-borne diseases, but all of them came back negative thrice,"" said Agarwal. The child's response to the treatment was slow and he continued bleeding from both lungs.""Finally, after a week of the tests coming back negative, we suspected that it could possibly be a case of hantavirus and conducted tests including chest X-rays, a complete blood count, and an oxygen saturation test,"" said Agarwal. Experts said the test results took about a week to confirm the diagnosis but the family discharged the child beforehand.The family, intending to take the boy to their native village in Karnataka, discharged him at 6 pm on Friday [14 Oct 2016], in a cardiac ambulance with ventilator facilities, while his condition was still critical. The doctors said that half-an-hour after the family left, the private laboratory confirmed their diagnosis. It is not known whether the child died in Mumbai.Dr Padmaja Keskar, executive health officer, BMC said the child had also been suffering from leptospirosis. ""As soon as we were notified about the case, we immediately conducted preventive measures for rodent extermination in the locality. We are taking the utmost care. Rats are the commonest carrier of the virus as their urine or dung can be infected. The virus is also air-borne. We detected 2 cases of fever in the same area and the patients are receiving treatment,"" said Keskar. She added that to confirm the diagnosis, they are waiting for the NIV report, which will take a week.Dr Om Shrivastava, infectious diseases expert, said the morbidity and mortality of the virus multiplies dangerously when the patient's condition escalates to the hemorrhaging stage. ""I have treated symptomatic cases of the virus long ago, but they both tested negative. This is extremely rare. The major issue is that the symptoms indicate multiple ailments, making it difficult for the doctor to reach an accurate diagnosis,"" said Shrivastava. He added that people need to be more careful about coming in contact with rodents, keeping this case in mind.[Byline: Sadaguru Pandit]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This report is confusing. Hospital tests for leptospirosis were reported as negative, but a local health officer said that the child had leptospirosis. In this report, as is usual in popular press reports of hantavirus infections, the test used and the type of hantavirus involved are not stated. If the National Institute of Virology [NIV] tests confirm the local laboratory results as a hantavirus infection, the hantaviruses that might be involved are Seoul, Puumala, Thailand, or less likely, Hantaan or Muju hantaviruses. ProMED would be interested in receiving results of the NIV tests when they become available.There have been previous reports of hantavirus occurrence in India. Some have been conflicting, with positive results in local laboratories and negative results from the NIV. Other recent cases of reported suspected hantavirus infections in India were in January 2014 in Kerala and October 2011 in Andhra Pradesh, where there were 3 cases of a suspected hantavirus infection in Nellore. The specific hantavirus involved in these cases was not stated either.In a 4 Feb 2010 ProMED-mail post (archive no. 20100205.0385), it was reported that Dr J. Clement and colleagues from the National Reference Laboratory for Hantavirus Infections, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium found evidence in India of the murine Seoul virus (SEOV) infection and also of the arvicoline Puumala virus (PUUV) infection, the latter in 2 fatal cases (from the Cochin and Chennai regions, respectively) with acute respiratory syndrome, symptoms similar to those in the more recently described Nellore cases in 2011 (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20111026.3187) as well as in the case described in 2011.Maps of India can be accessed at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/38653>. - Mod.TY]
