European Pharmaceutical Review [edited]<http://www.europeanpharmaceuticalreview.com/44697/news/industry-news/antibiotic-resistant-superbug-report/>Drug resistant bacteria have been found at several pharmaceutical manufacturing sites in India, a new report by campaigning organisation Changing Markets reveals. The report also casts light on the supply chain that links the factories investigated to companies, public health services (including the NHS) and hospitals in the US and Europe.On-the-ground research by investigative agency Ecostorm, and subsequent analysis of water samples under the supervision of Cambridge University's Dr Mark Holmes, found high levels of drug-resistant bacteria at sites in 3 Indian cities: Hyderabad [Telangana state], New Delhi [capital territory] and Chennai [Tamil Nadu state]. Out of 34 sites tested, 16 were found to be harbouring bacteria resistant to antibiotics, according to the study. At 4 of the sites, resistance to 3 major classes of antibiotics was detected, including antibiotics of 'last resort', those used to treat infections that fail to respond to all other medicines.Detailed examination of publicly available supply chain data, and evidence obtained through Freedom of Information requests, has uncovered how antibiotics manufactured at or near these sites are being exported to foreign purchasers, including the UK's National Health Service (NHS), French hospitals, and pharma majors including US distribution giant McKesson and French company Sanofi's generics arm Zentiva.Growing antimicrobial resistance (AMR), which is a matter of particular concern in the case of antibiotics, is one of the gravest threats to human health. Global deaths as a result of drug-resistant infections are projected to reach 10 million per year by 2050, with cumulative economic losses of [USD?] 100 trillion.Medical experts warn that in the near future, drug resistant infections could once again make common illnesses, minor surgery, and routine operations such as hip replacements a life-or-death gamble.Natasha Hurley, Campaign Manager at Changing Markets said, ""The dumping of antibiotic manufacturing residues poses a grave threat to human health in light of the growing AMR crisis. The discovery of drug-resistant bacteria at Indian factories supplying European and US markets also raises serious questions about pharmaceutical supply chains. Major buyers of antibiotics, such as the NHS, must immediately blacklist suppliers that are contributing to the spread of AMR through industrial pollution and ensure that all drug companies take action to clean up their supply chains. NHS doctors and nurses are working around the clock to tackle AMR; it is shocking that the pharmaceutical industry is undermining their lifesaving efforts through shoddy and dangerous practices.""One company in particular, Hyderabad-based Aurobindo Pharma, emerges as one of the worst offenders. A recidivist polluter at its own production sites in India, it also imports the raw materials used for making antibiotics from dirty factories in China. With clear links to McKesson, whose biggest customer is US drug retailer CVS Health, and an international network of subsidiaries affording direct access to European markets, Aurobindo is fast becoming a significant global presence.The report also reveals that in the UK, antibiotics under Aurobindo's Milpharm, Actavis, Arrow, and own-brand label have been purchased by Barts Health and Cheshire & Wirral Partnership NHS Trusts.Reacting to the report, Nina Renshaw, Secretary-General of the European Public Health Alliance (EPHA) said, ""This report is the latest in a series of studies showing that the pharmaceutical industry is contributing to the rise of antimicrobial resistance. We expect European governments and the European Commission to take this very seriously.""A 1st step should be incorporating measures to address environmental pollution, including from the antibiotics manufacturing process, in the European Commission's AMR action plan, which is currently under review. Unless we address all 3 causes of AMR -- human, animal and industrial -- in parallel, we risk losing the fight completely. That would be an unparalleled catastrophe for public health.""[Byline: Niamh Louise Marriott]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2]Date: Tue 18 Oct 2016Source: Changing Markets [edited]<http://www.mightyearth.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/CHANGING-MARKET-SUPERBUGS-IN-THE-SUPPLY-CHAIN-GUARD-FONT-FIN-PRINT.pdf>Executive Summary-----------------Superbugs, the colloquial name for strains of bacteria which have become resistant to antibiotics, present one of the most significant global health threats of the 21st century. Every year, nearly 1 million people worldwide die from drug resistant infections. With that figure projected to climb to 10 million by mid-century, medical experts now put drug resistance in the same bracket as the HIV/AIDS crisis, and are calling for a coordinated response from the international community to address the threat.It has taken years of sustained effort to place drug resistance on the international agenda, but at long last the medical experts' pleas are beginning to reach the ears of politicians. At the G20 in Hangzhou in September 2016, world leaders acknowledged the serious danger to public health, growth and global economic stability posed by antimicrobial resistance (AMR), a sentiment echoed at a special United Nations High-Level Meeting dedicated to the topic later on that month. However, despite this heightened sense of urgency, concrete action on tackling drug resistance remains slow and incomplete, and many seasoned observers fear that we are doing too little, too late.Against this sombre backdrop, the evidence is piling up that global pharmaceutical companies -- whose role it should be to cure sick people and channel resources into the development of new medicines -- are actually contributing to the spread of drug-resistant infections through pollution at their own production sites or those of their suppliers. A series of recent reports have shone a light on this, the 3rd major cause of AMR, by revealing how dirty production processes and the dumping of inadequately treated antibiotic manufacturing waste in China and India, where the lion's share of our drugs are made, is fuelling the worldwide spread of superbugs, amplifying the already considerable impact of the excessive consumption of antibiotics in human medicine and their profligate use in livestock rearing.This report, for the 1st time, exposes the occurrence of resistant bacteria surrounding pharmaceutical manufacturing plants in India and maps out the supply chain which delivers antibiotics from the dirty factories where they are produced to patients in Europe and the United States. An on-the-ground investigation by the investigative agency Ecostorm which took place in June 2016 and subsequent analysis of water samples under the supervision of Dr Mark Holmes from the University of Cambridge found high levels of drug resistant bacteria at sites in 3 Indian cities: Hyderabad, New Delhi and Chennai.In total, out of 34 sites tested, 16 were found to be harbouring bacteria resistant to antibiotics. At 4 of the sites, resistance to 3 major classes of antibiotics, namely the cephalosporins, carbapenems and the fluoroquinolones, was detected. At 8 of the sites, resistance to cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones was detected. At a further 4 of the sites, resistance to either cephalosporins or fluoroquinolones was found. Of the antibiotics manufacturing plants tested, 3 factories respectively belonging to Aurobindo Pharma, Orchid Chemicals, and Asiatic Drugs and Pharmaceuticals, all of which supply export markets either directly or indirectly, were found to be resistance hotspots.Detailed examination of publicly available supply chain data, and evidence obtained through Freedom of Information requests, has uncovered how antibiotics manufactured by these companies are being exported to the European and U.S. markets, including the United Kingdom's National Health Service (NHS), French hospitals, and German healthcare companies and U.S. pharma giants. Further supply chain links were also uncovered between polluting Chinese factories and Western markets.Although probably just the tip of the iceberg, this analysis adds to the current body of knowledge on the impacts of pollution in pharmaceutical supply chains and shows that urgent action is needed to address this problem. In the current era of international travel and trade, once created, superbugs can spread quickly around the world, meaning that pollution from drug factories in India and China is not just a localised problem for people living in these areas, but could accelerate one of the biggest global health crises facing humanity this millennium.One company in particular, Hyderabad-based Aurobindo, emerges as one of the worst offenders. A recidivist polluter at its own production sites in India, it also imports the raw materials used for making antibiotics from dirty factories in China. With strong commercial links to major players in the pharmaceutical industry, including U.S. giants McKesson and CVS Health, and an international network of subsidiaries affording direct access to Western export markets, Aurobindo has ambitions to continue expanding its global presence and market share. But at what cost to human health?This report sends a clear message that when it comes to addressing AMR, we must address each and every one of its 3 causes: human, animal and industrial, or else risk losing the fight completely. With growing awareness of the gravity of the threat posed by effluent from antibiotics plants, major purchasers of antibiotics, whether publicly-owned bodies or private companies, must use their buying power to make the pharmaceutical industry clean up its act. The failure to bring manufacturing waste under control is unacceptable, presents a clear public health threat, and negatively impacts the industry's reputation as a whole. As such, this is an issue that should be of concern to pharmaceutical companies' customers, investors, and public health authorities alike.With pharmaceutical supply chains still shrouded in mystery, purchasers should demand much more transparency on the origin of our antibiotics, requiring moves from the pharmaceutical sector mirroring those undertaken by the textiles industry in the wake of tragedies such as the Rana Plaza disaster in Bangladesh. A series of practical steps for the industry and regulators are presented at the end of this report, setting out a blueprint for best practice in a sector whose environmental performance leaves much to be desired.[The full article, including figures, photographs and references, is available at the source URL.]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[For a discussion of environmental pollution from industrial pharmaceutical waste see my moderator comments in a prior ProMED-mail post Antibiotic resistance (03): India (TG) environmental pollution 20161010.4548738. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/142>.]
