Scientific American journal, November 2016 issue [edited]<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/as-earth-warms-the-diseases-that-may-lie-within-permafrost-become-a-bigger-worry/>As earth warms, the diseases that may lie within permafrost become a bigger worry-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Scientists are witnessing the theoretical turning into reality: infectious microbes emerging from a deep freeze.This past summer [2016] anthrax killed a 12-year-old boy in a remote part of Siberia. At least 20 other people, also from the Yamal Peninsula, were diagnosed with the potentially deadly disease after approximately 100 suspected cases were hospitalized. Additionally, more than 2300 reindeer in the area died from the infection. The likely cause? Thawing permafrost. According to Russian officials, thawed permafrost -- a permanently frozen layer of soil -- released previously immobile spores of _Bacillus anthracis_ into nearby water and soil and then into the food supply. The outbreak was the region's first in 75 years.Researchers have predicted for years that one of the effects of global warming could be that whatever is frozen in permafrost -- such as ancient bacteria -- might be released as temperatures climb. This could include infectious agents humans might not be prepared for, or have immunity to, the scientists said. Now they are witnessing the theoretical turning into reality: infectious microorganisms emerging from a deep freeze.Although anthrax occurs naturally in all soil and outbreaks unrelated to permafrost can occur, extensive permafrost thaw could increase the number of people exposed to anthrax bacteria. In a 2011 paper published in Global Health Action, co-authors Boris A Revich and Marina A Podolnaya wrote of their predictions: ""As a consequence of permafrost melting, the vectors of deadly infections of the 18th and 19th centuries may come back, especially near the cemeteries where the victims of these infections were buried.""And permafrost is indeed thawing -- at higher latitudes and to greater depths than ever before. In various parts of Siberia the active layer above permafrost can thaw to a depth of 50 centimeters [about 20 in] every summer. This summer [2016], however, there was a heat wave in the region, and temperatures hovered around 35 deg C [95 deg F] -- 25 [deg C/45 deg F] warmer than usual. The difference possibly expanded or deepened the thaw and mobilized microorganisms usually stuck in rigid earth. Although scientists have yet to calculate the final depth, they postulate that it is a number that has not been seen in almost a century. Permafrost thaw overall could become widespread with temperatures only slightly higher than those at present, according to a 2013 study in Science. Heat waves in higher latitudes are becoming more frequent as well.What thawing permafrost could unleash depends on the heartiness of the infectious agent involved. A lot of microorganisms cannot survive in extreme cold, but some can withstand it for many years. ""_B. anthracis_ are special because they are sporulating bacteria,"" says Jean-Michel Claverie, head of the Mediterranean Institute of Microbiology and a professor at Aix-Marseille University in France. ""Spores are extremely resistant and, like seeds, can survive for longer than a century.""Viruses could also survive for lengthy periods. In 2014 and 2015 Claverie and his colleague Chantal Abergel published their findings on 2 still infectious viruses from a chunk of 30 000-year-old Siberian permafrost. Although _Pithovirus sibericum_ and _Mollivirus sibericum_ can infect only amoebas, the discovery is an indication that viruses that infect humans -- such as smallpox and the Spanish flu -- could potentially be preserved in permafrost.Human viruses from even further back could also make a showing. For instance, the microorganisms living on and within the early humans who populated the Arctic could still be frozen in the soil. ""There are hints that Neanderthals and Denisovans could have settled in northern Siberia [and] were plagued by various viral diseases, some of which we know, like smallpox, and some others that might have disappeared,"" Claverie says. ""The fact that there might be an infection continuity between us and ancient hominins is fascinating -- and might be worrying.""Janet Jansson, who studies permafrost at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Washington State [USA], is not worried about ancient viruses. Several attempts to discover these infectious agents in corpses have come up empty, she notes. She does advocate, however, for further research to identify the wide range of permafrost-dwelling organisms, some of which could pose health risks. To accomplish that goal, she and others are using modern molecular tools -- such as DNA sequencing and protein analysis -- to categorize the properties of unknown microorganisms, sometimes referred to as microbial dark matter.The likelihood and frequency of outbreaks similar to the one in Siberia will depend on the speed and trajectory of climate change. For instance, it is possible that another heat wave will expose the carcasses of animals infected by anthrax, Revich says. ""The situation on the Yamal Peninsula has shown that the risk of the spread of anthrax is already real,"" he adds.In effect, infectious agents buried in the permafrost are unknowable and unpredictable in their timing and ferocity. Thus, researchers say thawing permafrost is not our biggest worry when it comes to infectious diseases and global warming. The more immediate, and certain, threat to humans is the widening geographical ranges of modern infectious diseases (and their carriers, such as mosquitoes) as the earth warms. ""We now have dengue in southern parts of Texas [USA],"" says George C Stewart, McKee Professor of Microbial Pathogenesis and chair of the department of veterinary pathobiology at the University of Missouri [USA]. ""Malaria is seen at higher elevations and latitudes as temperatures climb. And the cholera agent, _Vibrio cholerae_, replicates better at higher temperatures.""Unlike the zombie microbes lurking in the permafrost, modern spreading diseases are more of a known quantity, and there are proved ways to curb them: mapping trends, eliminating mosquito-breeding sites, and spraying insecticides. Of course, dramatically lowering fossil-fuel emissions to combat climate change could tackle both threats -- the resurgence of ancient and deadly pathogens and the widening ranges of infectious diseases -- in one shot.[Byline: Sara Goudarzi]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] Frontiers in Microbiology journalDate: Fri 21 Oct 2016Source: Frontiers in Microbiology journal [edited]<http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.2016.01759/abstract>Ref: Forde TL, Orsel K, Zadoks RN, et al: Bacterial genomics reveal the complex epidemiology of an emerging pathogen in arctic and boreal ungulates. Front. Microbiol. 2016; 7: 1759. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01759----------------------------------------------------------------------Northern ecosystems are currently experiencing unprecedented ecological change, largely driven by a rapidly changing climate. Pathogen range expansion, and emergence and altered patterns of infectious disease, are increasingly reported in wildlife at high latitudes. Understanding the causes and consequences of shifting pathogen diversity and host-pathogen interactions in these ecosystems is important for wildlife conservation, and for indigenous populations that depend on wildlife.Among the key questions are whether disease events are associated with endemic or recently introduced pathogens, and whether emerging strains are spreading throughout the region.In this study, we used a phylogenomic approach to address these questions of pathogen endemicity and spread for _Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae_, an opportunistic multi-host bacterial pathogen associated with recent mortalities in arctic and boreal ungulate populations in North America. We isolated _E. rhusiopathiae_ from carcasses associated with large-scale die-offs of muskoxen in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, and from contemporaneous mortality events and/or population declines among muskoxen in northwestern Alaska and caribou and moose in western Canada. Bacterial genomic diversity differed markedly among these locations; minimal divergence was present among isolates from muskoxen in the Canadian Arctic, while in caribou and moose populations, strains from highly divergent clades were isolated from the same location, or even from within a single carcass.These results indicate that mortalities among northern ungulates are not associated with a single emerging strain of _E. rhusiopathiae_, and that alternate hypotheses need to be explored. Our study illustrates the value and limitations of bacterial genomic data for discriminating between ecological hypotheses of disease emergence, and highlights the importance of studying emerging pathogens within the broader context of environmental and host factors. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[3] National Public Radio (NPR)Date: Wed 12 Oct 2016 10:43 AM ETSource: National Public Radio (NPR) [edited]<http://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2016/10/12/496568291/killing-reindeer-to-stop-anthrax-could-snuff-out-a-nomadic-culture>Killing reindeer to stop anthrax could snuff out a nomadic culture [edited]----------------------------------------------------------------------[This article repeats much we have read before but it contained within it the following useful comments:][Florian Stammler, an anthropologist at the Arctic Centre at the University of Lapland, Finland] says, if the Russian government does indeed kill 250 000 reindeer, some families will be left with too few animals to haul their household across the tundra. ""When you deprive these people of their means of movement, they have to settle and find another way to make living,"" he says.On the surface, it looks a bit like the Russians may be trying to get the Nenets to settle down. One of the government policies under consideration calls for giving herders ""affordable mortgages"" on apartments in exchange for handing over their reindeer for culling, The Siberian Times reports. ""It's a logical plan,"" Stammler says, ""but it induces people to get rid of their reindeer so they can't move anymore.""There's no question the reindeer population is larger than it's ever been in the Yamal-Nenets region -- where the Nenets live. ""Herds have swelled since the 1920s until now,"" says Bruce Forbes, an ecologist at the Arctic Centre at the University of Lapland. ""There's been only one dip in the population. That was during World War II when the animals were used to feed Soviet troops.""Today there are more than 700 000 animals grazing in the Yamelo-Nenets. Russian officials say the area should have about half as many animals. They say large herds are damaging the ecosystem. They're overgrazing and leaving the land vulnerable to erosion. They're also trampling on -- and killing -- lichen that grow across sandy soil at higher elevations.But Forbes says all these ideas are speculation at this point. ""When we actually look at satellite imagery of the area, the data show that parts of the Yamal Peninsula aren't being grazed enough,"" he says. Some areas have tall shrubbery that are getting taller and taller, faster and faster, he says. ""Reindeer have grazed on the shrubs but not enough to keep them close to the ground."" And the total area of sandy, overgrazed areas hasn't expanded since the 1960s, Forbes says.So before we draw conclusions about the reindeer's effects on the land, Forbes says, scientists need to figure out really what's going on ecologically -- and whether a massive culling will indeed help curb future anthrax outbreaks. ""Let's avoid short-term decisions based on questionable data that will affect tundra nomads for decades to come, perhaps permanently,"" Forbes wrote in a comment on The Siberian Times website.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[What the Siberian tundra will reveal with climate change I must leave to others to hypothesise and then observe. And I expect significant funding will emerge for Arctic studies in North America, northern Europe, and Siberia.Bruce Forbes' comments about underutilised grazing and browsing is more immediate. Potential areas could be readily mapped using AVHRR [advanced very-high-resolution radiometer]/Vegetation Indices and LandSat imagery by any GIS [geographic information system] graduate student with funds for field testing and verification. And in minutes, not the hours it took me (mapping tick habitat in Guadeloupe) to do similar studies 30 years ago. Obviously it would have to be done in conjunction with the Yamal-Nenet people as they know the ground and tribal prior claims.There is a small map in the NPR report. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/428>. - Mod.MHJ]
