KMS [edited]<http://wkms.org/post/blood-parasite-increase-seen-ky-cattle#stream/0>Livestock transport could be causing an increase in a deadly blood parasite affecting the commonwealth's cattle industry. Murray State University Breathitt Veterinary Center department head Lucky Pittman says their diagnostic lab in Hopkinsville receives calls daily about anaplasmosis, a parasite carried mostly by ticks, biting flies and even surgical instruments.""Historically, this has been considered a disease of the southeastern U.S., but there have been cases diagnosed in the northern tier of the U.S. because people and their animals move around much more readily than they have in the past,"" said Pittman.Anaplasmosis is now widespread across the state according to Pittman, though more cases have been confirmed in the western portion than central and eastern Kentucky.The causative agent of bovine anaplasmosis, _Anaplasma marginale_, is a bacterial organism that Pittman says affects the red blood cells of cattle typically 2 years and older, causing the animals to rapidly become anemic and jaundiced.""It certainly can be a devastating condition in some herds when it gets introduced. Often times when producers are bringing their animals in, they may have lost 3 or 4 or 5 animals. They may have had some cows that were aborting calves because of the anemia that results from this parasite,"" explained Pittman.Pittman says treatment regimens vary from herd to herd, the most common involving injectable low level antibiotics from March to November, when ticks are most prevalent.""There is also a vaccine that is available, so those are things the livestock producer would need to discuss with their veterinarians as far as what would be the best approach for them to control the disease problem in their own herds."" Pittman said.Most cattle, according to Pittman, are not insured, so an infestation can costs thousands of dollars depending on the market and value of the animals.Livestock owners should be cautious until the 1st frost hits or a ""good killing freeze"" that Pittman says will end the seasonal disease until next spring.[Byline: Nicole Erwin]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This is a most interesting article. It seems like people are just now noticing the uptick in the number of cases. They have been steadily increasing in Kentucky and parts of Indiana since the early 2000's. Every year, along the watershed of the Ohio River, animals experience an increase in ticks and the diseases they transmit.""Anaplasmosis, formerly known as gall sickness, traditionally refers to a disease of ruminants caused by obligate intraerythrocytic bacteria of the order Rickettsiales, family Anaplasmataceae, genus _Anaplasma_. Cattle, sheep, goats, buffalo, and some wild ruminants can be infected with the erythrocytic _Anaplasma_. Anaplasmosis occurs in tropical and subtropical regions worldwide (around 40o N to 32o S), including South and Central America, the USA, southern Europe, Africa, Asia, and Australia.""Bovine anaplasmosis is of economic significance in the cattle industry.""Clinical bovine anaplasmosis is usually caused by _A marginale_. An _A marginale_ with an appendage has been called _A caudatum_, but it is not considered to be a separate species. Cattle are also infected with _A centrale_, which generally results in mild disease. _A ovis_ may cause mild to severe disease in sheep, deer, and goats. _A phagocytophilum_ has recently been reported to infect cattle; however, natural infection is rare and it does not cause clinical disease.""Up to 17 different tick vector species (including _Dermacentor_, _Rhipicephalus_ _Ixodes_, _Hyalomma_, and _Argas_) have been reported to transmit _Anaplasma_ spp. Not all of these are likely significant vectors in the field, and it has been shown that strains of _A marginale_ also coevolve with particular tick strains. _Rhipicephalus_ (_Boophilus_) spp are major vectors in Australia and Africa, and _Dermacentor_ spp have been incriminated as the main vectors in the USA. After feeding on an infected animal, intrastadial or trans-stadial transmission may occur. Transovarial transmission may also occur, although this is rare, even in the single-host _Rhipicephalus_ spp. A replicative cycle occurs in the infected tick. Mechanical transmission via biting dipterans occurs in some regions. Transplacental transmission has been reported and is usually associated with acute infection of the dam in the 2nd or 3rd trimester of gestation. Anaplasmosis may also be spread through the use of contaminated needles or dehorning or other surgical instruments.""There is a strong correlation between age of cattle and severity of disease. Calves are much more resistant to disease (although not infection) than older cattle. This resistance is not due to colostral antibody from immune dams. In endemic areas where cattle 1st become infected with _A marginale_ early in life, losses due to anaplasmosis are minimal. After recovery from the acute phase of infection, cattle remain chronically infected carriers but are generally immune to further clinical disease. However, these chronically infected cattle may relapse to anaplasmosis when immunosuppressed (e.g., by corticosteroids), when infected with other pathogens, or after splenectomy. Carriers serve as a reservoir for further transmission. Serious losses occur when mature cattle with no previous exposure are moved into endemic areas or under endemically unstable situations when transmission rates are insufficient to ensure that all cattle are infected before reaching the more susceptible adult age.""In animals less than one year old, anaplasmosis is usually subclinical; in yearlings and 2-year-olds it is moderately severe, and in older cattle it is severe and often fatal. Anaplasmosis is characterized by progressive anemia due to extravascular destruction of infected and uninfected erythrocytes. The prepatent period of _A marginal_ is directly related to the infective dose and typically ranges from 15-36 days (although it may be as long as 100 days). After the prepatent period, peracute (most severe but rare), acute, or chronic anaplasmosis may follow. Rickettsemia approximately doubles every 24 hours during the exponential growth phase. Generally, 10-30 percent of erythrocytes are infected at peak rickettsemia, although this figure may be as high as 65 percent. RBC count, PCV, and hemoglobin values are all severely reduced. Macrocytic anemia with circulating reticulocytes may be present late in the disease.""Animals with peracute infections succumb within a few hours of the onset of clinical signs. Acutely infected animals lose condition rapidly. Milk production falls. Inappetence, loss of coordination, breathlessness when exerted, and a rapid bounding pulse are usually evident in the late stages. The urine may be brown but, in contrast to babesiosis, hemoglobinuria does not occur. A transient febrile response, with the body temperature rarely exceeding 106 F (41 C) occurs at about the time of peak rickettsemia. Mucous membranes appear pale and then yellow. Pregnant cows may abort. Surviving cattle convalesce over several weeks, during which hematologic parameters gradually return to normal.""_Bos indicus_ breeds of cattle appear to possess a greater resistance to _A marginale_ infection than _B. taurus_ breeds, but variation of resistance of individuals within breeds of both species occurs. Differences in virulence between _Anaplasma_ strains and the level and duration of the rickettsemia also play a role in severity of clinical manifestations.""Lesions are typical of those found in animals with anemia due to erythrophagocytosis. The carcasses of cattle that die from anaplasmosis are generally markedly anemic and jaundiced. Blood is thin and watery. The spleen is characteristically enlarged and soft, with prominent follicles. The liver may be mottled and yellow-orange. The gallbladder is often distended and contains thick brown or green bile. Hepatic and mediastinal lymph nodes appear brown. There are serous effusions in body cavities, pulmonary edema, petechial hemorrhages in the epi- and endocardium, and often evidence of severe GI stasis. Widespread phagocytosis of erythrocytes is evident on microscopic examination of the reticuloendothelial organs. A significant proportion of erythrocytes are usually found to be parasitized after death due to acute infection.""_A marginale_, together with the hemoprotozoa _Babesia bovis_ and _B bigemina_, are the causative agents of tick fever in cattle. These 3 species have similar geographic distributions, except that anaplasmosis occurs in the absence of babesiosis in the USA. Microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained thin and thick blood films is critical to distinguish anaplasmosis from babesiosis and other conditions that result in anemia and jaundice, such as leptospirosis and theileriosis). Blood in anticoagulant should also be obtained for hematologic testing. In Giemsa-stained thin blood films, _Anaplasma_ spp appear as dense, homogeneously staining blue-purple inclusions 0.3-1.0 ë m in diameter. _A marginale_ inclusions are usually located toward the margin of the infected erythrocyte, whereas _A centrale_ inclusion bodies are located more centrally. _A caudatum_ cannot be distinguished from A marginale using Giemsa-stained blood films. Special staining techniques are used to identify this species based on observation of characteristic appendages associated with the bacteria. A caudatum has been reported only in North America and could possibly be a morphologic form of _A marginale_ and not a separate species. Inclusion bodies contain 1-8 initial bodies 0.3-0.4 um in diameter, which are the individual rickettsiae. The percentage of infected erythrocytes varies with the stage and severity of disease; maximum rickettsemias in excess of 50 percent can occur with _A marginale_. Microscopically, the infection becomes visible 2-6 wk after transmission. During the course of infection, the rickettsemia can double each day for up to 10 days and then decreases. Severe anemia can persist for weeks after parasites cannot be detected in blood smears.""Chronically infected carriers may be identified with a fair degree of accuracy by serologic testing using the msp5 ELISA, complement fixation, or card agglutination tests. Nucleic acid-based detection methods are most useful, because species and strain differentiation tests may not detect carrier levels""At necropsy, thin blood films of liver, kidney, spleen, lungs, and peripheral blood should be prepared for microscopic examination.""Tetracycline antibiotics and imidocarb are currently used for treatment. Cattle may be sterilized by treatment with these drugs and remain immune to severe anaplasmosis subsequently for at least 8 months.""Prompt administration of tetracycline drugs (tetracycline, chlortetracycline, oxytetracycline, rolitetracycline, doxycycline, minocycline) in the early stages of acute disease (eg, PCV greater than15 percent) usually ensures survival. A commonly used treatment consists of a single IM injection of long-acting oxytetracycline at a dosage of 20 mg/kg. Blood transfusion to partially restore the PCV greatly improves the survival rate of more severely affected cattle. The carrier state may be eliminated by administration of a long-acting oxytetracycline preparation (20 mg/kg, IM, at least 2 injections with a 1-wk interval). Withholding periods for tetracyclines apply in most countries. Injection into the neck muscle rather than the rump is preferred.""Imidocarb is also highly efficacious against _A marginale_ as a single injection (as the dihydrochloride salt at 1.5 mg/kg, SC, or as imidocarb dipropionate at 3 mg/kg). Elimination of the carrier state requires the use of higher repeated doses of imidocarb (eg, 5 mg/kg, IM or SC, 2 injections of the dihydrochloride salt 2 wk apart). Imidocarb is a suspected carcinogen with long withholding periods and is not approved for use in the USA or Europe."" <http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/circulatory_system/blood_parasites/anaplasmosis.html> - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/220>.]
