Sky News [edited]<http://news.sky.com/story/london-city-airport-reopens-after-dozens-treated-over-chemical-scare-10626683>CS gas spray found after London City Airport evacuated------------------------------------------------------Officers are investigating a ""chemical incident"" that left dozens ill and closed the airport for several hours.Police investigating a ""chemical incident"" at London City Airport have found suspected CS gas spray.Paramedics treated 27 and took 2 people to hospital after the airport was closed and evacuated on Friday afternoon [21 Oct 2016].About 500 people were told to leave the airport and travelers were told to expect ""long delays"".Firefighters and police wearing protective equipment carried out 2 complete sweeps of the airport building and declared the incident over.But they failed to find anything that might have caused it.However, a later Met Police statement said: ""A subsequent search of the airport led to the discovery of what is believed to be a CS gas spray.""Whilst the cause of the incident has not yet been confirmed, officers are investigating whether it was the result of an accidental discharge of the spray.""Enquiries continue. This is not being treated as a terrorist-related incident. At this early stage officers believe that the spray may have been discarded by a passenger prior to check-in."" Scores of passengers were moved on to the tarmac outside the terminal building.London Ambulance's assistant director of operations, Paul Gibson, said: ""We were called at 4.11pm to reports of an incident at London City Airport.""We sent a number of resources to the scene including 2 single responders in cars, 4 ambulance crews, an incident response officer and our Hazardous Area Response Team (medics specially trained to treat people in hazardous situations).""London City Airport advised people due to fly to check with their airlines for latest flight information.Incoming planes from destinations such as Frankfurt, Amsterdam, Belfast City and Paris had to be diverted to other airports.The airport later tweeted: ""Airport has now reopened. We thank passengers for their patience, access to terminal will be staggered and disruption to flights expected.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[CS a cyanocarbon and is the primary component of a product commonly called tear gas. Tear gas or CS gas is known as a riot control agent. CS is also known as 2-chlorobenzalmalononitrile or called o-chlorobenzylidene malononitrile with a chemical formula: C10H5ClN2.Effects of exposure to this compound through its most common form, tear gas, range from an irritation of eyes and mucous membrane to vomiting, and are often over within an hour. However, research has shown that people with prior conditions such as asthma, cardiovascular disease, and hypertension may experience longer lasting effects and a worsening of their prior conditions. While extremely uncommon, exposure to CS under the right conditions, such as a confined space, a person with pre-existing conditions, and a strong concentration of the compound, can be fatal.As 2-chlorobenzalmalononitrile is a solid at room temperature, not a gas, a variety of techniques have been used to make this solid usable as an aerosol:- Melted and sprayed in the molten form.- Dissolved in organic solvent.- CS2 dry powder (CS2 is a siliconized, micro-pulverized form of CS).- CS from thermal grenades by generation of hot gases.Adverse Health Effects----------------------Most Common EffectsCS, when used in its most common form of aerosol, causes an irritation of the mucous membranes of the eye, nose, throat, and stomach. The effect of exposing these membranes to CS include tearing, conjunctivitis, uncontrolled blinking, headache, and a burning sensation. Other effects include vomiting and redness of the skin. These effects normally dissipate within an hour of exposure, however several studies have shown oral and respiratory irritation to last for a month following initial exposure.Severe EffectsIn addition to the common effects of CS exposure, several cases have been recorded that detail more severe, longer lasting effects of the chemical compound. Bullous DermatitisExtreme blistering and inflammation of the skin. This symptom is most often seen in people who have experienced repeated exposures to CS. Researchers believe that people can develop a contact allergy after their 1st exposure to CS, making the effects in future exposures more intense and long lasting. Vocal Cord and Throat DamageIn one case, when the subject was exposed to high levels of CS gas in a confined area for 10 seconds, serious health conditions took 5 weeks to fully clear up. The vocal cords were swollen and a crust had built up in the trachea causing respiratory problems. Researchers expect severity and duration of these effects to increase with longer exposures. Longer lasting effects such as sleep apnea and loss of breath after exercise or strenuous work were experienced by several people months after exposure. Treatment---------If exposed to CS, the 1st thing a person should do is move to fresh air. The longer you inhale the gas for the longer the effects will last, with the potential for harsher effects to occur. Watch breathing as shortness of breath may occur. If this lasts for over 60 seconds, supplemental oxygen may be necessary. With eye exposure, it is necessary to wash eyes with room temperature water or saline solution for 15 minutes. If irritation continues consult a doctor. We hope those taken for medical treatment have recovered and were able to resume/complete their travels. While this was not serious in terms of life, it could be a trial for something else, or it could be a bizarre accident. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/279>.].................................................sb/tg/je/ml"
