Food Poisoning bulletin [edited]<https://foodpoisoningbulletin.com/2016/fda-investigating-homeopathic-teething-product-adverse-effects/>The FDA is investigating more than 400 reports of adverse events associated with homeopathic teething products in the last 6 years, Lyndsay Meyer of the FDA's Office of Media Affairs told Food Poisoning Bulletin. In addition, they are ""aware of reports of 10 deaths during that period that reference homeopathic teething products, though the relationship of these deaths to the homeopathic teething products has not yet been determined and is currently under review,"" she stated.TeethingOn 9 Sep 2016, the FDA received a comprehensive report of a recent adverse event of a child having a seizure associated with the use of a homeopathic teething product, triggering an investigation. Other adverse events reported to the government included ""seizure, death, fever, shortness of breath, lethargy, constipation, vomiting, sleepiness, tremor, agitation, and irritability.""On 30 Sep 2016, the government released a report warning parents about possible ""serious effects"" of these products. Some homeopathic teething tablets and gels are made with belladonna, a compound that blocks functions of the central nervous system. It seems that some of these products can contain varying amounts of belladonna, which is ""widely regarded as unsafe,"" according to WebMD, and can cause serious harm at larger doses. These products are not evaluated by the government for safety or efficacy before they are sold, according to the 2010 FDA report.This is an ongoing investigation. Government officials ""have not yet completed the analysis of products to determine if there is an association between the adverse events and the homeopathic teething products."" However, Ms. Meyer did state that ""our preliminary review shows that these adverse events are similar to those observed in 2010 when the FDA warned of belladonna toxicity associated with Hyland's Teething Tablets, when we also issued a warning to protect the public health.""Ms. Meyer also stated that while adverse event reports give some information about a product, they often indicate situations that ""require additional analysis and do not constitute conclusive evidence of a problem with the product."" Adverse events may also be attributable to other problems, such as a patient's underlying health conditions. And the number of adverse events identified with a product can change as the investigation continues and more information becomes available.At this time, the FDA recommends that parents do not give their children homeopathic teething tablets and gels. Symptoms of problems associated with these products include difficulty breathing, lethargy, excessive sleepiness, muscle weakness, skin flushing, constipation, and agitation after using the product. Your child should be taken to a doctor if any of these symptoms develop.If you have purchased any homeopathic teething products, do not use them. Throw them away or take them back to the place of purchase for a refund. After the FDA's warning, CVS voluntarily removed all homeopathic teething products from their stores. These products may have been sold at other stores and online.You can report any adverse effects to the FDA through their MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting System. An online form is available at the FDA web site.[Byline: Linda Larsen]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Belladonna is the common name for the plant _Atropa belladonna. This is a member of the nightshade family, which includes tomatoes, potatoes and eggplants.This plant is a member of the Solanaceae family or the family of the deadly nightshades. Most of these plants include tropane alkaloids which include atropine, scopolamine and hyscyamine. These may also be known as belladonna alkaloids. The toxins are the alkaloids which are known to produce hallucinations and delirium.These alkaloids were often put into the eyes of young women. The pupils of the eyes dilate, and the ladies with large eyes were considered to be more attractive. However, the woman may not have recognized her suitor in the daylight as the dilated pupils would have prevented her from seeing clearly. The term belladonna means ""pretty lady"" in Italian.Belladonna poisoning may cause symptoms related to the effect of the toxins, including dilated pupils (and, therefore, sensitivity to light), blurry vision, staggering, perhaps a loss of balance, headache, tachycardia (rapid heart rate), flushing of the skin, and very dry mouth and throat. Speech may be slurred, and there is often evidence of delirium and convulsions. The affected person may have hallucinations and severe confusion. Some people may have constipation and/or urine retention. These latter symptoms may not have been noticed in teething children.Treatment for belladonna alkaloids are pharmaceutical anticholinergics, such as physostigmine or pilocarpine. This is the same treatment for atropine poisoning.Herbal product safety testing and efficacy testing are quite different from those of drugs that go through the formal pharmacological testing required by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). While herbals can be quite effective, some can be toxic, as possibly in this case. - Mod.TG].................................................sb/tg/msp/ml"
