Scientific Reports 6, Article number: 35296 (2016) doi:10.1038/srep35296 [edited]<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep35296>Hicham El Costa, Jordi Gouilly, Jean-Michel Mansuy, Qian Chen, Claude Levy, GÌ©raldine Cartron, Francisco Veas, Reem Al-Daccak, Jacques Izopet & Nabila Jabrane-Ferrat. ZIKA virus reveals broad tissue and cell tropism during the 1st trimester of pregnancy.AbstractThe outbreak of the Zika Virus (ZIKV) and its association with fetal abnormalities have raised worldwide concern. However, the cellular tropism and the mechanisms of ZIKV transmission to the fetus during early pregnancy are still largely unknown. Therefore, we ex vivo modeled the ZIKV transmission at the maternal-fetal interface using organ culture from 1st trimester pregnancy samples. Here, we provide evidence that ZIKV strain circulating in Brazil infects and damages tissue architecture of the maternal decidua basalis, the fetal placenta and umbilical cord. We also show that ZIKV replicates differentially in a wide range of maternal and fetal cells, including decidual fibroblasts and macrophages, trophoblasts, Hofbauer cells as well as umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells. The striking cellular tropism of ZIKV and its cytopathic-induced tissue injury during the 1st trimester of pregnancy could provide an explanation for the irreversible congenital damages.ConclusionIn summary, our present work on 1st-term pregnancy, provide evidence that ZIKV targets a set of tissues critical for fetus development including the maternal decidua, the fetal placenta as well as the umbilical cord. Furthermore, we show that ZIKV replicates differentially in a wide range of maternal and fetal cells, including dFibroblasts, dMì¥, trophoblasts and HBC suggesting that the virus can reach the fetus through a succession of adjacent target cells from the decidua basalis to the anchoring villi. Our findings provide groundwork for translational research initiatives and can be used to develop efficient strategies to prevent congenital ZIKV.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[Recent reports, including this one, continue to provide insights into the physiopathological changes and cell and tissue tropisms leading to fetal malformations and microcephaly. This report again emphasizes the importance of Zika virus infections during the 1st trimester of pregnancy. An effective vaccine of reasonable cost is needed urgently to prevent these maternal-fetal infections. - Mod.TY]******[3] Genome analysis and microcephalyDate: Wed 19 Oct 2016Source: Mol BioSystems DOI: 10.1039/C6MB00645K [edited]<http://pubs.rsc.org/en/Content/ArticleLanding/2016/MB/C6MB00645K?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+rss%2FMB+(RSC+-+Mol.+BioSyst.+latest+articles)#!divAbstract>Camila Freze Baez, VictÌ ria Alves Barel, Alessandra Souza, Carlos R. Rodrigues, Rafael Brandao Varella, Nuria Cirauqui Diaz. Analysis of worldwide sequence mutations in Zika virus proteins E, NS1, NS3 and NS5 from a structural point of view.AbstractZika virus (ZIKV) is an emergent arbovirus that has attracted attention in the last year as a possible causative agent of congenital malformation, remarkably increasing microcephaly risk during otherwise healthy pregnancies. We present here an analysis of all ZIKV sequences available in Genbank up to April 2016, studying the mutations in the whole polyprotein, and their possible structural implications for the proteins E, NS1, NS3 and NS5. This study suggests that microcephaly is not a consequence of any particular amino acid substitution but, conceivably, a feature of ZIKV itself. Moreover, the structural analysis of ZIKV proteins, together with its mutational landscape and the structure-sequence comparison with other flaviviruses, allows the suggestion of regions that could be exploited as anti-ZIKV targets, which includes some allosteric sites found on the DENV NS3 or NS5 proteins.--Communicated by:ProMEd-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Explaining the absence of reports of microcephaly and other teratogenic effects of Zika virus infection in Asia and Africa, where the virus is endemic, has been challenging, given the occurrence of these anomalies in the Americas. Genetic mutation has been one hypothesis. The above study suggests that genetic mutation is not responsible. - Mod.TY]******[4] Alteration of host cell functionDate: Thu 20 Oct 2016Source: Cell Host and Microbe DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2016.10.002 [edited]<http://www.cell.com/cell-host-microbe/fulltext/S1931-3128(16)30398-5>Gianluigi Lichinchi6, Boxuan Simen Zhao6, Yinga Wu, Zhike Lu, Yue Qin, Chuan He, Tariq M. Rana. Dynamics of Human and Viral RNA Methylation during Zika Virus Infection.SummaryInfection with the flavivirus Zika (ZIKV) causes neurological, immunological, and developmental defects through incompletely understood mechanisms. We report that ZIKV infection affects viral and human RNAs by altering the topology and function of N6-adenosine methylation (m6A), a modification affecting RNA structure and function. m6A nucleosides are abundant in ZIKV RNA, with 12 m6A peaks identified across full-length ZIKV RNA. m6A in ZIKV RNA is controlled by host methyltransferases METTL3 and METTL14 and demethylases ALKBH5 and FTO, and knockdown of methyltransferases increases, while silencing demethylases decreases, ZIKV production. YTHDF family proteins, which regulate the stability of m6A-modified RNA, bind to ZIKV RNA, and their silencing increases ZIKV replication. Profiling of the m6A methylome of host mRNAs reveals that ZIKV infection alters m6A location in mRNAs, methylation motifs, and target genes modified by methyltransferases. Our results identify a mechanism by which ZIKV interacts with and alters host cell functions.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This article adds to the understanding of virus-host relationships leading to increased virus replication. - Mod.TY]******[5] Ocular findingsDate: Fri 21 Oct 2016Source: Medscape [edited]<http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/870830>One in every 2 babies with congenital Zika syndrome can have ocular findings related to the virus, experts said here at the American Academy of Ophthalmology 2016 Annual Meeting.""Mothers infected in the 1st trimester have more chance of having a baby with ocular findings,"" said Camila Ventura, MD, PhD, an ophthalmologist from the Altino Ventura Foundation in Recife, Brazil. And ""babies born with a smaller head circumference also have a higher chance of having ocular findings,"" she reported. Although there have been reports of damage to the retina, the optic nerve, and the retinal vessels, the most common finding is a scar in the macula, said Dr Ventura.The connection between Zika and eye problems was 1st made in Recife, after the 4 neonatal intensive care units began to see babies born with microcephaly. ""Because we were screening for retinopathy of prematurity, we started detecting ocular findings in these babies. One month later, we were able to prove the association between Zika and microcephaly,"" Dr Ventura explained.Reports began to flood the media about microcephaly, but ""that was just the tip of the iceberg,"" she said. ""Now we know this is a syndrome. There is no doubt that Zika is causing a syndrome and it involves not only neurologic findings, but also hearing deficits, ocular findings, and skeletal findings.""Optic nerve hypoplasia is being seen in more patients. ""We are thinking the next steps are to analyze the optic nerves of these babies to try to determine when in the embryologic period this is happening and when it's triggering the effects in these babies' eyes,"" she added. It is not clear at the moment whether the virus can reactivate, she pointed out.Zika is on the radar of most ophthalmologists, but the extent of ocular related issues might not be. ""We're seeing from the team in Brazil how important it is to consider not just evaluating microcephalic infants but also infants born to mothers exposed to Zika in their pregnancy,"" said Steven Yeh, MD, from the Emory Eye Center in Atlanta.""The group out of Bascom Palmer Eye Institute in Miami is also starting to see these eye-related findings associated with Zika,"" he told Medscape Medical News. ""With microcephalic infants, we know there can be retinal abnormalities, but in adults who are infected with Zika, there have been reports of uveitis,"" Dr Yeh pointed out.The scope of the Zika is extensive. ""As of last week, Zika was in 59 countries and territories, including 49 in the Americas,"" Dr Rasmussen reported. The latest figures show that more than 800 pregnant women in the United States are infected with Zika, and most of these infections are related to travel or sexual transmission. In Puerto Rico and the other territories, more than 1800 pregnant women are infected.There's no vaccine and no specific antiviral treatment, so the current goal is to treat the symptoms, said Dr Rasmussen.It is important not to forget the ""cause of the causes,"" said Rubens Belfort Jr, MD, PhD, head professor of ophthalmology at the Federal University of Sao Paulo. ""This is related to poverty,"" he explained. ""And we as ophthalmologists should emphasize the importance of addressing the social aspects. ""Care for affected children is complex and expensive. ""Often what the whole family receives per month is less than what they need to purchase their milk,"" he reported. A camera to scan the retina currently costs more than USD 100 000, which points to the need for affordable equipment options.It is premature to expect a vaccine, Dr Belfort added. ""Zika, in many aspects, is like HIV. It is here to stay, and we'll be dealing with it for a long time. Don't expect a miracle in the short term.""The development of a Zika vaccine and testing for the virus are complicated by the fact that human antibody responses after infection with the dengue, yellow fever, and chikungunya viruses are highly cross-reactive to Zika [Chikungunya virus is in a different family and not antigenically related to Zika virus, so there is no cross-reactivity of antibodies. - Mod.TY].""A lot of chikungunya diagnosed in Brazil last year [2015] was misdiagnosed as Zika,"" Dr Belfort pointed out.[Byline: Marcia Frellick]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Ocular examination of neonates and infants in areas of active Zika virus transmission will be necessary to determine the scope of these eye problems. Zika virus infections are turning out to be complicated and expensive. Effective vaccines and vector mosquito control measures to prevent Zika virus infections are needed urgently. - Mod.TY]
