Clay Center Dispatch [edited]<http://www.ccenterdispatch.com/news/article_06b14560-97be-11e6-9b54-d7c78e59e054.html>US Army Corps of Engineers and Kansas Department of Health and Environment officials warn that the southern zone of Milford Lake remain under warning for blue-green algae. The northern and middle portions are under a watch.Avoid contact with water in areas under a warning, as algae level is considered unsafe for people and animals in this area. Posted notices for each specific zone should be observed.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] New JerseyDate: Fri 21 Oct 2016Source: NorthJersey.com [edited]<http://www.northjersey.com/community-news/town-government/state-issues-warning-about-toxins-in-shepherd-lake-1.1681142>Visitors to Shepherd Lake in Ringwood State Park [New Jersey] are being warned to avoid contact with the water. A 7 Oct [2016] test came back positive for cyanobacteria, which can produce toxins that are harmful to humans and animals.Those planning to cast a lure or walk a dog in the Shepherd Lake section of Ringwood State Park should be aware that a potentially dangerous bacterium was recently detected in the water.Visitors to that section of the park are being warned that the lake recently tested positive for toxins associated with a cyanobacterial harmful algal bloom (HAB). People, pets, and livestock should avoid contact with or ingestion of the water, especially if the surface appears to contain a bright bluish-green algae. Any fish caught under the same conditions should not be eaten.Although state officials do not anticipate this situation escalating, the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has posted a warning on its website as a precaution. Cyanotoxins can cause damage to the skin, liver, and nervous system. Exposure can occur during swimming, fishing, wading, or water sports.The DEP became aware of the bloom earlier this month after the Ringwood Health Department detected blue-green algae on Cupsaw Lake, upstream from Shepherd Lake. On 7 Oct 2016, the DEP's Bureau of Water Monitoring and Division of Parks and Forestry conducted tests at Shepherd Lake that came back with evidence of HAB, but according to DEP spokesman Larry Hajna, ""The toxins associated with the bacteria were negligible.""Because Shepherd Lake has been closed to swimming since before Labor Day, it's unlikely that anyone has been exposed to the algae in that manner. Routine water tests conducted throughout the summer did not show anything unusual.""The bacteria was not detected in those tests,"" Hajna said.The incidence of HABs is most common in late summer and early fall. Excess nutrients in the form of phosphates can cause organisms in the water to reproduce exponentially, leading not only to the depletion of oxygen but also to the rise of cyanotoxins that may be present.""This bacteria is naturally occurring,"" Hajna said, ""but can be exacerbated by nutrients, just like any algae.""Because it will die off on its own as the weather grows cooler, the DEP is not planning to take any action to combat the algae which might ultimately do more harm than good.""Trying to kill the bacteria could actually release toxins,"" Hajna explained, ""so we chose to allow nature to take its course.""He said the DEP will continue to monitor and test the lake throughout the coming months.[Byline: Holly Stewart]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is a little late in the year to be seeing this in New Jersey; however, they have had a very unusual spell of water.There are a number of very toxic blue-green algae or cyanobacteria. The toxin may be present even if the algae are not, and likewise the algae may be present but the toxin may not be. However, safety for humans and animals means avoiding bodies of water with any blue-green algae.""There are a number of blue-green algae, many of which are toxic, frequently resulting in rapid death for animals. Blue-green algae, also known as cyanobacteria, are a group of photosynthetic bacteria that many people refer to as 'pond scum.' Blue-green algae are most often blue-green in color, but can also be blue, green, reddish-purple, or brown. Blue-green algae generally grow in lakes, ponds, and slow-moving streams when the water is warm and enriched with nutrients like phosphorus or nitrogen.""When environmental conditions are just right, blue-green algae can grow very quickly. Most species are buoyant and will float to the surface, where they form scum layers or floating mats. When this happens, we call this a 'blue-green algae bloom.' Blue-green algae blooms generally occur between mid-June and late September, although in rare instances, blooms have been observed in winter, even under the ice. Also in warmer years, blooms may be found in the Northern Hemisphere as early as April.""Many different species of blue-green algae occur, but the most commonly detected include _Anabaena_ sp, _Aphanizomenon_ sp, _Microcystis_ sp, and _Planktothrix_ sp. It is not always the same species that blooms in a given water body, and the dominant species can change over the course of the season.""Blue-green algal toxins are naturally produced chemical compounds that sometimes are produced inside the cells of certain species of blue-green algae. These chemicals are not produced all of the time, and there is no easy way to tell when blue-green algae are producing them and when they are not. When the cells are broken open, the toxins may be released. Sometimes this occurs when the cells die off naturally and they break open as they sink and decay in a lake or pond. Cells may also be broken open when the water is treated with chemicals meant to kill algae, and when cells are swallowed and mixed with digestive acids in the stomachs of people or animals.""Typical clinical signs in dogs exposed to blue-green algae include seizures, vomiting, and/or diarrhea after contact with surface water. Although the water appears clear, if a 'bloom' is just starting, it may be difficult to see any sheen, an early indication of blue-green algae formation. Some forms of blue-green algae may start forming slightly below the surface and may not be visible, but are just as toxic.""One toxic alga frequently involved in illness and deaths is _Microcystis aeruginosa_, a single-celled blue green alga, or cyanobacterium, that occurs naturally in surface waters. Microcystis can proliferate to form dense blooms and mats under certain conditions. Many variants of these cyanobacteria produce multiple toxins, including the potent liver toxin microcystin. When microcystis die, their cells break open, releasing the toxin microcystin into the water. Ingestion of water or algal cells containing microcystin has produced adverse effects in fish, dogs, cats, livestock, and humans. Sometimes the mats and the sheen of the organisms are visible on the surface of the water, if it is a pond. In larger bodies of water, such as large lakes, it may be more difficult or impossible to see the sheen or the mat of accumulation.""People swimming in dense microcystis blooms have experienced irritation such as skin rashes, burns, and blistering of the mouth. Ingestion or inhalation of water containing dense bloom material may cause vomiting, nausea, headaches, diarrhea, pneumonia, and fever. Ingestion of significant levels of the toxin microcystin can cause liver damage and dysfunction in humans and animals. No deaths from ingestion of microcystins have been reported in humans in the US; however, Brazil has reported human deaths. Dogs, wildlife, and livestock have died following exposure to this toxin.""Microcystis blooms typically thrive in warm, turbid, and slow-moving waters. The blooms with the highest biomass occur in waters that are high in nitrogen or phosphorus (eutrophic waters). Microcystis also requires sufficient light intensity to conduct photosynthesis, which results in blooms.""The commonest route of exposure to microcystin is drinking water, followed by recreational exposures and food supplements. Typical water treatment processes do not fully remove microcystin that might be present in drinking water supplies stored in reservoirs. Swimming and playing in water that contains, or recently contained, microcystis blooms is another common exposure route. Children have the highest risk of exposure since they tend to unintentionally ingest water while swimming. Microcystin can move through the aquatic food web, exposing fish and shellfish, as well as the people who consume them. Microcystin does not remain in edible fish and shellfish tissues for more than a few weeks. However, people who frequently consume sport fish caught from a water body that supports microcystis blooms have a higher risk of exposure. Dogs can ingest large amounts of microcystis cells when they clean their coats after playing in water. Livestock, wildlife, and dogs are exposed through drinking water containing microcystis or through ingesting algal mats.""Toxins produced by blue-green algae-----------------------------------Toxins are compounds that have a harmful effect on other cells, tissues and organisms. In the natural environment, these toxins are generally contained within the blue-green algal cell but they are released into the water when the cell is damaged or dies.Blue-green algal toxins can be divided into the following groups:1. Hepatotoxins- Hepatotoxins cause blood to collect in the liver causing circulatory shock and can lead to death by internal hemorrhaging.- Hepatotoxins can cause weakness, vomiting and diarrhoea.- Nodularin and microcystin are 2 types of hepatotoxins.- Nodularin is produced by the algal species _Nodularia spumigena_.- Microcystins can bioaccumulate in aquatic invertebrates such as mussels so aquatic animals caught from water where there is an algal bloom should not be eaten.2. Neurotoxins- Neurotoxins interfere with the functioning of the nervous system and can cause death of humans and animals within minutes by causing paralysis of the respiratory muscles.- Marine dinoflagellates (red tides) produce saxitoxins (also known as paralytic shellfish poisons) which concentrate in shellfish and have been known to cause death in humans.3. Non-specific toxins- Cylindrospermopsin is a non-specific toxin produced by the blue-green algae _Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii_ and _Aphanizomenon ovalisporum_.- This toxin is a relatively slow-acting toxin that damages most organs in the body including the liver.4. Dermatoxic lipopolysachharides- When non-toxic species of blue-green algae are present at concentrations above 10 cubic mm per litre, the water may still pose a risk to recreational and domestic users as all blue-green algae have lipopolysachharides in their cell walls.- Lipopolysachharides are less toxic than hepatotoxins or neurotoxins but are significant in terms of water supply for drinking, showering and recreation.- Lipopolysachharides have been associated with outbreaks of gastroenteritis, skin and eye irritations, and hay fever, in humans who have come into contact with algal blooms. Humans who contact lipopolysachharides in the aerosol form (fine spray such as from a sprinkler) may suffer asthma, eczema, and blisters in the lining of the nose and mouth.A microscopic look at microcystin can be found at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microcystis_aeruginosa> and <https://www.epa.gov/nutrient-policy-data/cyanobacteriacyanotoxins>. The 2nd link also has pictures of how the water looks with this organism.Portions of this comment were extracted from <http://oehha.ca.gov/media/downloads/ecotoxicology/fact-sheet/microfactsheet122408.pdf> and <http://www.water.nsw.gov.au/water-management/water-quality/algal-information>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/232>.]
