Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/pesticide-tainted-marijuana-prompts-oregon-health-alert-49552/>The Oregon Health Authority (OHA) is issuing a health alert regarding marijuana products that may have been tainted with high levels of a pesticide and sold to about 130 people in the McMinnville area.The alert concerns dried flower marijuana that New Leaf, a medical marijuana dispensary located at 3325 NE Riverside Drive in McMinnville, sold under the strain names Dr. Jack, batch number G6J0051-02, and Marion Berry, batch number G6J0051-01.The products were sold to about 130 recreational and medical marijuana customers between 17-19 Oct 2016 and came from batches that failed a pesticide test because they contained high levels of a chemical known as spinosad.Anyone who visited the dispensary during this time frame should check the label of the product they purchased and immediately return any of the tainted product to the dispensary, or dispose of it in a safe and responsible manner.The OHA ""action level"" for spinosad is 0.2 parts per million (ppm). The batches of Dr. Jack and Marion Berry contained 42 and 22 ppm, respectively.Effects of smoking marijuana containing spinosad are not known. Those concerned about exposure to spinosad or who are experiencing health problems after using affected marijuana strains should contact the Oregon Poison Center at 800-222-1222.""There is no level of spinosad that has been shown to be safe in cannabis that is smoked,"" says David Farrer, Ph.D., a public health toxicologist with OHA. ""Our action levels serve as a pre-market screen, but should not be considered 'safe levels.'""EPA has established health-based levels of spinosad that are allowed on food products. However, these ""tolerances,"" as they are called, have not been developed for cannabis and assume that the product will be swallowed as opposed to smoked [If made into marijuana butter or brownies, then it would be swallowed vs. smoked. - Mod.TG].The tainted batches were transferred to the dispensary by a McMinnville grower that had the marijuana tested by an accredited and licensed cannabis testing laboratory. The affected strains came from just the one grower and were transferred only to New Leaf. Strains with similar names sold at other dispensaries are not believed to have been affected.OHA is not naming the grower because that information is confidential under Oregon law.OHA officials are investigating why the batches were transferred from the grower to the dispensary and then sold by the dispensary to customers, as the products were transferred with failed test results.If a marijuana item fails a pesticide test and a re-test, the batch from which samples were taken must be destroyed. More information about cannabis testing can be found on the OHA website.OHA offers the following tips to consumers considering purchasing marijuana products:Read marijuana product labels. All labels must have the producer's business or trade name and licensee or registrant number; the business or trade name of licensee or registrant that packaged or distributed the product, if different from the producer; the name of the strain; and the universal symbol.Request a copy of the pesticide test results from the dispensary.People choosing to smoke marijuana should consider the negative effects that smoking may have on their health.According to the National Pesticide Information Center (NPIC) at Oregon State University, spinosad is a natural substance made by a soil bacterium that can be toxic to insects. It is used to control such pests as thrips, leaf miners, spider mites, mosquitoes, ants and fruit flies. NPIC also notes that spinosad is low in toxicity to people and other mammals, but it can cause irritation and redness if it gets on your skin or in your eyes. The effects of smoking a product contaminated with spinosad are unknown.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Spinosad is a natural substance made by a soil bacterium that can be toxic to insects. It is a mixture of 2 chemicals called spinosyn A and spinosyn D. It is used to control a wide variety of pests. These include thrips, leafminers, spider mites, mosquitoes, ants, fruit flies and others.Given that it is active against these various pests, there may have been a presumed legitimate reason for the plants to have been sprayed with the product.Spinosad is used for other pests such as fleas, ticks and flies in cattle, dogs and cats.Currently, spinosad is found in over 80 registered pesticide products. Many of these are used on agricultural crops and ornamental plants. Others are used in and around buildings, in aquatic settings, and as seed treatments. These products are commonly sprays, dusts, granules, and pellets. Some of these products are approved for use in organic agriculture.Spinosad is also found in some drugs regulated by the US Food and Drug Administration. These products are used to control head lice on people and fleas on dogs and cats.Spinosad affects the nervous system of insects that eat or touch it. It causes their muscles to flex uncontrollably. This leads to paralysis and ultimately their death, typically within 1-2 days.People are most commonly exposed to very low levels of spinosad through their diet. Exposure can also occur if you breathe it in or get it on your skin or eyes. For example, this can occur while applying sprays or dusts during windy conditions. This can also happen after using a product if you don't wash your hands before eating or smoking. You can limit your exposure and reduce the risk by carefully following the label instructions.Spinosad is low in toxicity to people and other mammals. However, if it gets on your skin or in your eyes it can cause irritation and redness. In one study, 28 dogs were fed low to moderate doses of spinosad. One dog that received a moderate dose vomited. No effects related to spinosad were observed in the other dogs.When eaten, spinosad is readily absorbed. Once inside it moves to many areas of the body and is broken down. The majority leaves the body in feces or urine within 1-2 days. Spinosad is absorbed poorly through skin contact.So while there may be no precedent for the chemical being inhaled, we do know that if the marijuana is ingested (such as in Alice B. Toklas brownies - Mod.MPP) that it is readily absorbed. We know the melting point and the vapor pressure of the product, but not whether it is broken down or absorbed when smoked.Portions of this comment have been extracted from: <http://npic.orst.edu/factsheets/spinosadgen.html>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/239>.].................................................sb/tg/msp/mpp"
