WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update - 274 (based on data up to 2 Oct 2016)-------------------------------------------------------SummaryInfluenza activity decreased in Oceania, South Africa, and temperate South America. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere remained at inter-seasonal levels.- In temperate South America, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity decreased throughout most of the sub-region. In Chile, influenza-like illness (ILI) and laboratory confirmed influenza detections decreased but remained elevated with A(H3N2) viruses predominant followed by influenza B viruses. In Paraguay, ILI and severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) cases decreased with decreasing detections of respiratory viruses.- In the temperate countries of Southern Africa, influenza detections decreased with A(H1N1)pdm09 virus dominant.- In Oceania, influenza virus activity decreased in the last few weeks. Influenza A(H3N2) remained the dominant circulating influenza virus.In Australia, activity decreased but was still high, while in New Zealand ILI consultation rates remained below the seasonal baseline level.- In the Caribbean countries, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained low except in Cuba where influenza B virus detections increased and in French Guiana where ILI activity and influenza detections increased slightly. In Central America, influenza virus activity remained low but detections of RSV increased in several countries.- In tropical South America, respiratory virus activities remained low in most of the countries, except in Colombia, where RSV activity increased.- In tropical countries of South Asia, influenza activity was generally low with predominantly influenza B detections.- In South East Asia, in general a decreasing trend in influenza detection was observed, although in Lao People's Democratic Republic (PDR) and Thailand increased number of influenza detections were reported in recent weeks.- In tropical countries of Africa, Ghana and Senegal reported slightly increased influenza activity.- In Northern temperate Asia, influenza activity remained low with predominantly influenza A(H3N2) detections in northern China.- In North America and Europe, influenza activity was low with few influenza virus detections and ILI levels below seasonal thresholds. In the United States, RSV activity increased.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 76 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 19 Sep 2016 to 2 Oct 2016 (data as of 14 Oct 2016 04:42:06 UTC). The WHO GISRS [Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System] laboratories tested more than 43038 specimens during that time period. 2619 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 2150 (82.1 percent) were typed as influenza A and 469 (17.9 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 161 (9.3 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 1577 (90.7 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 22 (19.6 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 90 (80.4 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.[The detailed influenza update can be accessed at the source URL above.]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Overall, influenza activity has not picked up yet in most regions and is already decreasing in the southern hemisphere. No novel influenza viruses reported during this update period. - Mod.UBA]
