FiercePharma [edited] <http://www.fiercepharma.com/vaccines/lack-vaccination-costs-u-s-7-billion-a-year-research>Many Americans don't get their vaccines as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Whatever their reasons, when they actually get sick, it's a significant burden to the U.S. economy.Last year, unvaccinated adults cost the economy USD 7.1 billion, an analysis done by the University of North Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill found. Researchers at the UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy examined the cost of care, medication and lost productivity caused by missing the 10 vaccines recommended by the CDC.Those 10 vaccines protect people against 14 pathogens, including influenza, tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, herpes zoster virus, pneumococcal diseases, meningococcal diseases, measles, mumps, rubella, HPV, chickenpox, hepatitis A and hepatitis B. Flu took the lion's share of the total, accounting for about USD 5.8 billion, with pneumococcal disease and shingles coming in next at USD 1.86 billion and USD 782 million respectively.Americans have traditionally lagged in flu shot adherence. Even though the CDC recommends that everyone 6 months of age and older should be vaccinated against flu every season unless a doctor suggests otherwise, only 42 percent of adults bothered to get 1 during the 2015-2016 flu season, according to a CDC estimate. With AstraZeneca's nasal mist version of the flu vax, FluMist, unavailable this year [2016] because of a deficiency in efficacy, the CDC is worried that the flu vaccination rate could drop even further.Of course, adults' opinions of vaccines can also affect vaccination rates for children. Parental opposition to vaccines recently forced the American Academy of Pediatrics to change its stance to suggest that pediatricians can dismiss parents who don't comply with the recommended vaccine schedules. In 2015, a measles outbreak traced back to Disneyland in California also raised concerns about the growing trend among parents who shun childhood vaccines.The UNC study was funded by Merck, a large vaccine player whose list of products includes HPV vax market leader Gardasil, pneumococcal vax Pneumovax 23 and zoster vaccine Zostavax, among others. The company does not market a flu vaccine.As the goal of the UNC project was to estimate the economic burden of vaccine-preventable diseases rather than to study the impact of vaccination, the research focused on the costs incurred for treating those diseases and did not factor in the cost of vaccination, the study's lead author, Associate Professor Sachiko Ozawa, told FiercePharma in an email. ""Of course our study is just one step, and it would be important to look at the cost of vaccination programs alongside the benefits of vaccination to understand the return on investment,"" Ozawa said.According to the adult influenza vaccine price list published by the CDC for the 2016-2017 flu season, a single dose of flu shot can cost from USD 14.41 (Novartis' Fluvirin) to USD 35.75 (Protein Sciences' Flublok) for private providers and citizens.With the adult population of the U.S. around 247.8 million, according to statistics by the U.S. Census Bureau, if that entire population were vaccinated at the USD 14.41 private sector price, the cost would be about USD 3.57 billion. However, it is also possible for individuals to get free flu shots from certain healthcare plans provided by their employers or from taxpayer-funded public health agencies.[Byline: Angus Liu][A similar report has been publiched in Spanish at: <http://noticiasdelaciencia.com/not/21548/los-costes-sanitarios-de-la-gente-que-no-se-vacuna/>. - Mod.LK]--Communicated byKathryn Soderholm<kathryn.soderholm@gmail.com>[What Would Happen If We Stopped Vaccinations?---------------------------------------------Before the middle of the last century, diseases like whooping cough, polio, measles, _Haemophilus influenza_, and rubella struck hundreds of thousands of infants, children and adults in the U.S. Thousands died every year from them. As vaccines were developed and became widely used, rates of these diseases declined until today most of them are nearly gone from our country.- Nearly everyone in the U.S. got measles before there was a vaccine, and hundreds died from it each year. Today, most doctors have never seen a case of measles.- More than 15 000 Americans died from diphtheria in 1921, before there was a vaccine. Only 1 case of diphtheria has been reported to CDC since 2004.- An epidemic of rubella (German measles) in 1964-65 infected 12.5 million Americans, killed 2000 babies, and caused 11 000 miscarriages. In 2012, 9 cases of rubella were reported to CDC.Given successes like these, it might seem reasonable to ask, ""Why should we keep vaccinating against diseases that we will probably never see?"" Here is why:Vaccines don't just protect you-------------------------------Most vaccine-preventable diseases are spread from person to person. If one person in a community gets an infectious disease, he can spread it to others who are not immune. But a person who is immune to a disease because she has been vaccinated can't get that disease and can't spread it to others. The more people who are vaccinated, the fewer opportunities a disease has to spread.If 1 or 2 cases of disease are introduced into a community where most people are not vaccinated, outbreaks will occur. In 2013, for example, several measles outbreaks occurred around the country, including large outbreaks in New York City and Texas - mainly among groups with low vaccination rates. If vaccination rates dropped to low levels nationally, diseases could become as common as they were before vaccines.[According to the CDC, 92 percent of measles cases in 2013 were in unvaccinated people. From 2000 to 2011, global measles deaths were reduced from 548 000 to 158 000, with particular success in Sub-Saharan Africa. This accomplishment is credit to the World Health Organization's Measles & Rubella Initiative. - Mod.LK]Diseases haven't disappeared----------------------------The United States has very low rates of vaccine-preventable diseases, but this isn't true everywhere in the world. Only one disease -- smallpox -- has been totally erased from the planet. Polio no longer occurs in the U.S., but it is still paralyzing children in several African countries. More than 350 000 cases of measles were reported from around the world in 2011, with outbreaks in the Pacific, Asia, Africa, and Europe. In that same year, 90 percent of measles cases in the U.S. were associated with cases imported from another country. Only the fact that most Americans are vaccinated against measles prevented these clusters of cases from becoming epidemics.Disease rates are low in the United States today. But if we let ourselves become vulnerable by not vaccinating, a case that could touch off an outbreak of some disease that is currently under control is just a plane ride away.A final example: what could happen----------------------------------We know that a disease that is apparently under control can suddenly return, because we have seen it happen, in countries like Japan, Australia, and Sweden. Here is an example from Japan. In 1974, about 80 percent of Japanese children were getting pertussis (whooping cough) vaccine. That year there were only 393 cases of whooping cough in the entire country, and not a single pertussis-related death. Then immunization rates began to drop, until only about 10 percent of children were being vaccinated. In 1979, more than 13 000 people got whooping cough and 41 died. When routine vaccination was resumed, the disease numbers dropped again.The chances of your child getting a case of measles or chickenpox or whooping cough might be quite low today. But vaccinations are not just for protecting ourselves, and are not just for today. They also protect the people around us (some of whom may be unable to get certain vaccines, or might have failed to respond to a vaccine, or might be susceptible for other reasons). And they also protect our children's children and their children by keeping diseases that we have almost defeated from making a comeback. What would happen if we stopped vaccinations? We could soon find ourselves battling epidemics of diseases we thought we had conquered decades ago.(Excerpted from <http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vac-gen/whatifstop.htm>)A significant proportion (estimated to be approximately 30 percent) of those who refuse to be vaccinated with the MMR vaccine stems from a 1998 Lancet publication connecting the MMR vaccine to the development of autism spectrum disorder (the Wakefield controversy). This paper was retracted in 2004, and soon after, the author of the study, Andrew Wakefield, was stripped of his medical license for falsifying data. In the years since, dozens of studies and reports have found no link between MMR vaccine and autism. Nonetheless the myth lives on.Other reasons for low vaccination rates may be lack of health insurance, lack of understanding of the importance to public health, or lack of time to devote to getting families vaccinated. Regardless, the cost of not vaccinating a child with MMR is significant. According to a 2011 publication in J Infec Dis, the cost of responding to and containing 7 measles cases in 2 Arizona hospitals during a single outbreak precipitated by an infected traveler was USD 799 136. This figure did not include effort spent by the state department of health, and was simply the cost of handling the measles itself without severe complications of the disease (Chen SY, Anderson S, Kutty PK, et al. Health Care-Associated Measles Outbreak in the United States After an Importation: Challenges and Economic Impact. J Infect Dis. 2011; 203(11):1517-25. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir115, PMID: 21531693, available at <http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2011/04/25/infdis.jir115.full.pdf+html>).Other recommended reading includes: Hotez PJ. Texas and Its Measles Epidemics (2016) Texas and Its Measles Epidemics. PLoS Med. 2016; 13(10):e1002153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002153, PMID: 27780206. - Mod LKA map of the United States may be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>].................................................lk/ao/mpp"
