Citizen Digital [edited]<https://citizentv.co.ke/news/six-die-after-consuming-camel-meat-146652/>Six people have died in Tiaty Village, Baringo County after consuming meat from the carcass of a camel. The 6 died at Akwachatis Clinic in the county after doctors tried for a week to treat them. According to doctors at the clinic, the 6 were among over 100 people alleged to have consumed the meat last week.""They all came here complaining of stomach pains and diarrhea. It is then that we found out that they had consumed meat from the carcass of a camel that died as a result of disease without knowing that the sickness was deadly,"" said Paul Chebet, a nurse at the clinic.Nelson Lotela, a local leader at Silale in Baringo, confirmed that the camel had died as a result of a disease, but the villagers disregarded the fact. He advised villagers in surrounding towns to avoid consuming camel meat until all camels in the area were inspected.In 2015, 54 people died after eating meat from a sick cow.[Byline: Atieno Mboya]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>[There is not adequate information to define the cause of this outbreak of illness following the ingestion of meat from a camel carcass. It is not stated how many of the 100 or so villagers became ill, so a case-fatality rate (CFR) cannot be calculated, but if all ca. 100 became ill, a 6% CFR is significant for a gastroenteritis, as the CFR for cholera is around 1%. If fewer were affected, the CFR would be higher. Therefore, the usual bacterial (and viral) causes of foodborne illness such as Salmonella, Campylobacter, enterohemorrhagic E. coli and Brucella are unlikely, and brucellosis generally does not produce prominent diarrhea. It is also possible that some toxic substance was involved.Certainly camels have been shown to harbor the MERS coronavirus, and the infection may cause diarrhea, however, it primarily causes respiratory symptoms (1). Of note, the WHO considers certain groups to be at high risk for severe MERS; these groups include people with diabetes, kidney failure, or chronic lung disease, and people who have weakened immune systems. The World Health Organization recommends that these groups take additional precautions (<http://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/mers/risk.html>):- Avoid contact with camels;- Do not drink raw camel milk or raw camel urine;- Do not eat undercooked meat, particularly camel meat.Two infections that deserve some consideration in the initial differential diagnosis here are anthrax and plague. Gastrointestinal anthrax most often develops after eating contaminated meat, with an incubation period of 1-7 days after the ingestion of spores from the meat (2-4). It may occur as an oropharyngeal form or an intestinal form, with the latter presenting with nausea, vomiting, fever and diarrhea, often bloody, but watery diarrhea has been reported. A relatively unique form of transmission occurred after an animal hide drumming event (5).Gastrointestinal involvement with _Y. pestis_ occurs, and the classical form after ingestion is in the pharynx, and has been reported after the ingestion of camel meat (6), although 2 of the 12 reported cases also had diarrhea. In that regard, a cluster of gastroenteritis cases without oropharyngeal involvement following the eating or handling of camel meat has been reported from Afghanistan, with a 20% CFR (17 of 83) (7).For the reader's interest, the following is from a blog regarding eating camel meat, with a recipe(<http://www.anissas.com/when-camel-meat-was-fashionable/>):""Camel meat was reasonably popular back then, popular enough for doctors to gravely warn against eating too much of it (in the manner of doctors throughout the ages). They held it to be ""heating"" and to ""engender thick blood,"" and declared it suitable only ""for those who do exhausting labor."" Or suffer from ""hot stomach"" and diarrhea, oddly.There was a special word for camel meat, jazur, which basically means ""that which is slaughtered."" Occasionally, the word was applied to mutton, but most of the recipes mention hump, which is kind of a giveaway that we're talking camel.There's a whole chapter of camel stews in the 10th-century book Kitab al-Tabikh. Here's the 1st recipe. Pay attention in case you ever need to stew camel, complete with its hump. (Anissa: and if you do, here below is where you can find it at Malak Lahm el-Jamal, which is what the Arabic sign says, meaning the king of camel meat!)Camel rib and leg meatCamel humpOnionsVinegarSoy saucePepperCorianderCarawayMixed spices (abzar, probably like the baharat or hawayij of modern Arab cookery)Slice up the meat and hump as if you were going to make the medieval fry-up called qaliyya. Cook the sliced meat in a pot until it gives up all its moisture, then add onions and the sliced hump and cook everything together until the hump renders its fat.Add the vinegar, soy sauce, pepper, coriander, caraway and mixed spices to taste (the recipe gives no measurements at all) and continue cooking until everything is done.Yes, they had a sort of soy sauce in the medieval Arab world. Murri was made by culturing barley the same way that soy beans are cultured in the Far East. The 2nd jazuriyya recipe is pretty much the same as the 1st, except that instead of soy sauce, you add bunn, which was the rotted barley paste from which the barley ""soy sauce"" was pressed.It must be significant that the heading of chapter 77 says it contains bunniyyat as well as jazuriyyat. None of the 6 dishes in the chapter is actually named bunniyya, but 5 of them contain either bunn or soy sauce. I've never had camel meat; maybe its flavor just cries out for soy sauce.But maybe not. Kitab al-Tabikh describes a royal Persian dish called (in Arabic) ma-wa-milh. The recipe calls for hump (sanam) as well as meat from the back, belly and thighs (of an unnamed animal, but if you have a hump, you pretty much already have a whole camel lying around). However, ma-wa-milh was a soupy stew with hand-cut noodles in it served with a garnish of garlic and walnuts stewed in broth. No soy sauce. I retract my theory.""Baringo County is one of the 47 counties of Kenya and is located in part of the former Rift Valley Province in west-central Kenya. Its location can be seen on a map at: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baringo_County#/media/File:Baringo_County_in_Kenya.svg>.References---------1. Assin A, Al-Tawfig JA, Al-Rabeeah AA, et al: Epidemiological, demographic, and clinical characteristics of 47 cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus disease from Saudi Arabia: a descriptive study. Lancet Infect Dis 2013;13:752-7612. Beatty ME, Ashford DA, Griffin PM, Tauxe RV, Sobel J: Gastrointestinal anthrax: Review of the literature. Arch Intern Med 2003;163:2527-25313. Maddah G, Abdollahi A, Katebi, M: Gastrointestinal anthrax: clinical experience in 5 cases. Caspian J Intern Med 2013;4: 672-6764. CDC: Human ingestion of _Bacillus anthracis_-contaminated meat -- Minnesota, August 2000. MMWR 2000;49: 813-8165. CDC: Gastrointestinal anthrax after an animal-hide drumming event -- New Hampshire and Massachusetts, 2009. MMWR 2010;59: 872-8776. Arbaji A, Kharabsheh S, Al-Azab S, et al: A 12-case outbreak of pharyngeal plague following the consumption of camel meat, in north-eastern Jordan. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2005;99: 789-7937. Leslie T, Whitehouse CA, Yingst, et al: Outbreak of gastroenteritis caused of Yersinia pestis in Afghanistan. Epidemiol Infect 2011;139: 728-735. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/174>.]
