Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Weekly 65(42);1174-1175 [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6542a5.htm?s_cid=mm6542a5_e>Notes from the Field: Evaluation of the Sensitivity and Specificity of a Commercially Available Rapid Syphilis Test -- Escambia County, Florida, 2016-------------------------------Matthias J, Dwiggins P, Totten Y, Blackmore C, Wilson C, Peterman TA.In December 2014, the Food and Drug Administration granted the 1st-ever Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments waiver for a rapid treponemal syphilis screening test, Syphilis Health Check (SHC) (1). SHC is a new tool for public health programs to combat increasing syphilis rates, specifically among persons without a prior syphilis infection. SHC can be performed by nonlaboratorian health care personnel and results are available in 10 minutes. In 2015, a total of 7094 noncongenital cases of syphilis (35.8 case per 100,000) were reported to the Florida Department of Health (2). The Florida Department of Health evaluated the performance of SHC in comparison with treponemal and nontreponemal tests routinely used in its sexually transmitted disease (STD) clinic in Escambia County.For this evaluation, patients seeking STD testing at the Florida Department of Health STD clinic in Escambia County during 11 March 21-April 2016 were tested for syphilis using the SHC on blood specimens obtained by fingerstick; a venous blood specimen was drawn concurrently and submitted for treponemal (Trep-Sure), and nontreponemal (Arlington Scientific, Inc. [ASI] rapid plasma reagin [RPR] card test for syphilis) testing at the state public health laboratory. The state public health laboratory in Florida uses the CDC-recommended algorithm for syphilis testing (i.e., nontreponemal testing followed by treponemal testing for persons with a reactive nontreponemal test); however, for the purpose of this study, all collected specimens underwent treponemal testing regardless of the nontreponemal test result. The SHC result was compared with results of routine syphilis testing using the traditional testing algorithm at the state laboratory. Sensitivity, specificity, and overall laboratory test agreement were determined using the Trep-Sure qualitative enzyme immunoassay (EIA) reference treponemal test as the standard for ""true"" positive or negative treponemal test results.The SHC was used to screen 202 patients for syphilis. Among these patients, 171 (85%) were nonreactive on all syphilis tests (SHC, EIA, and RPR), 26 (13%) had a reactive SHC, and 5 (2%) had a nonreactive SHC but had one or more reactive tests at the state laboratory. Among the 26 reactive SHCs, 10 (38%) had a reactive EIA (6 had a reactive RPR), and 16 (62%) were not confirmed by EIA or RPR at the state laboratory. For the 6 reactive SHC patients with reactive EIA and reactive RPR, 3 were staged as secondary syphilis, one as primary syphilis, one as early latent syphilis, and one was a previously treated positive with no increase in titer since last testing. Among the 5 specimens that were reactive on other tests but SHC nonreactive, only one was both RPR (1:8 serum dilution) and EIA reactive. It came from a patient with primary syphilis and a history of herpes simplex virus 2, and a reactive RPR (1:2 serum dilution) that was collected 6 days before the SHC test.The sensitivity of SHC was 71.4% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 41.9%-95.1%) when compared with the Trep-Sure (EIA) reference treponemal test (Table). The specificity of the SHC compared with the reference treponemal test was 91.5% (95% CI = 87.5%-95.5%).The findings in this study are subject to at least one limitation. The sample size was 202; however, results indicate a high proportion of reactive SHC tests were not confirmed by reference treponemal testing (16 of 26, 61.5%). This relatively low positive predictive value suggests that reactive SHC results should be interpreted with caution. Furthermore, 4 of 14 specimens that tested positive on the reference treponemal test tested negative on the SHC, including one from a patient with primary syphilis. Sensitivity and specificity analyses of the SHC using fingerstick specimens at the Florida Department of Health in Escambia County's STD clinic were significantly lower than the over 98% reported by the manufacturer of SHC in a 510(k) submission (3). Further evaluation of the sensitivity and specificity of the SHC in additional health care settings is needed to determine whether SHC might be beneficial in identifying patients who might have syphilis, especially in settings where phlebotomy is unavailable.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[According to Trinity Biotech, the manufacturer of Syphilis Health Check (SHC): ""Syphilis Health Check is a qualitative rapid membrane immune-chromatographic assay for the detection of _Treponema pallidum_ (syphilis) antibodies in human whole blood, serum and plasma. The test, which acts as a screening test, will primarily be performed in a CLIA waived setting using finger stick samples of whole blood only, with results being available in as little as 12 minutes. All positive tests should be followed up with further syphilis serological laboratory testing and clinical evaluation before final diagnosis"" (<http://www.trinitybiotech.com/Press%20Release/Trinity%20Biotech%20Announces%20CLIA%20waiver%20of%20Rapid%20Syphilis%20Test.pdf>).Tests, like SHC, that measure antibody against _T. pallidum_, are called treponemal serological tests. Their results do not indicate the stage of disease and do not differentiate between past and current infection. They may be negative during the 1st few weeks of infection with _T. pallidum_ and do not differentiate syphilis from infections, such as yaws and pinta, caused by closely related treponemal pathogens.Non-treponemal tests such as Rapid Plasma Reagin test (RPR) detect antibodies that are not specifically directed against the _Treponema pallidum_ but against cardiolipin released early in infection. The tests are sensitive, but since they are non-specific, false-positive results can be caused by, for example, IV drug use, pregnancy, Lyme disease, certain types of pneumonia, malaria, tuberculosis, or certain autoimmune disorders including lupus.Because with non-treponemal tests false-positive reactions can occur, confirmation with a treponemal test that is specific for _T. pallidum_ antibodies is recommended. Non-treponemal tests when quantitated are useful in staging the disease and monitoring treatment for syphilis; these tests typically become negative in an adequately treated person after about 3 years, whereas the treponemal tests remain positive for life even after treatment. In some patients, however, non-treponemal antibodies can persist at a low titer for a long period of time, sometimes for the life of the patient. This response is referred to as the ""serofast reaction.""Screening tests, like the SHC, are often used in clinical practice to assess the likelihood that a person has a particular medical condition. Using this test, this study found that if someone has syphilis, there is only 71.4% probability that the screening test will be positive (the sensitivity), with 28.6% having a false-negative reaction. If a someone does not have syphilis, there is a 91.5% probability that the screening test will be negative (the specificity), with 8.5% having a false-positive reaction.If the screening test is positive, the probability that someone actually has the disease (the positive predictive value) is only 38.4% (10 of 26), unlike the 61.5% (16 of 26) that is stated in the report above. - Mod.ML]
