GameRant [edited]<https://gamerant.com/vr-headset-herpes/>VR Headset Blamed for Ocular Herpes Outbreak--------------------------------------------A YouTuber causes a scare among virtual reality fans after posting an anonymous conversation that links an ocular herpes outbreak to those who have shared a VR [virtual reality] headset.Virtual reality fans recently received some good news when it was announced that the PlayStation VR outsold every other console on the market in Japan during its 1st week. Virtual reality hasn't quite completely taken the games industry by storm, due in large part to the high price of entry associated with other headsets like the Oculus Rift or HTC Vive, but many industry watchers have said that Sony has a real opportunity with the more affordable PlayStation VR to get a lot more people interested in virtual reality. With the PlayStation VR also starting to pull in positive reviews following its launch 2 weeks ago, things appear to be going really well for Sony and VR fans in general right now.So in other words, this is a really bad time for virtual reality to be associated with a major health scare. But that's exactly what is happening if a screenshot originally posted by YouTuber Drift0r is to be believed.The Daily Dot reports that the screenshot features a conversation between 2 anonymous VR developers who are talking with each other about an ocular herpes outbreak among individuals who have been using VR headsets. It seems that the disease is being passed from gamer to gamer at places like trade shows and demo booths where multiple people share the same headset.""Ocular herpes is going around VR headsets, ones that are used to share with people,"" the 1st developer writes. ""Game studio told us it's going around, have to clean headset regularly.""After some back and forth, another developer confirms the news, noting that ocular herpes is caused by the herpes simplex virus. Ocular herpes causes inflammation and general discomfort, sometimes leading to cold sores but around the eye instead of the mouth, according to the Daily Dot.It's worth noting that this is just one anecdotal claim and it's coming from anonymous developers. We don't even know which specific headset was being referenced in this conversation, but any gamer or member of the games media who has attended conventions like Penny Arcade's PAX or E3 will be the 1st to tell you about the dreaded ""convention flu"" that often afflicts multiple attendees in the days following the event. Coming into contact with a game controller that has been touched by hundreds or even thousands of other people has never been good for your health, and now it seems we're seeing an especially gross version of this same problem affect virtual reality headsets.Hopefully, this news will catch the attention of developers who work such events and steps will be taken to ensure a sanitary gaming experience for all involved. Virtual reality still has a lot to prove considering that a lot of gamers still think VR is too expensive, so it's going to be critical for the industry as a whole to come together and make sure stories like this one don't become commonplace.[Byline: Jason Gallagher]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[ProMED requests information from anyone who may have more knowledge on infection with herpes simplex virus [HSV] associated with VR headsets, as well as information on this particular outbreak of HSV.Caused by the type 1 herpes simplex virus, eye herpes (ocular herpes) is a common, recurrent viral infection affecting the eyes. This type of herpes virus can cause inflammation and scarring of the cornea that sometimes is referred to as a cold sore on the eye. Herpes of the eye can be transmitted through close contact with an infected person whose virus is active.The National Eye Institute (NEI) says an estimated 400 000 Americans have experienced some form of ocular herpes, with close to 50 000 new and recurring cases occurring each year.Forms of Eye Herpes-------------------Ranging from a simple infection to a condition that can possibly cause blindness, there are several forms of eye herpes:- Herpes keratitis is the most common form of eye herpes and is a viral corneal infection. Ocular herpes in this form generally affects only the top layer, or the epithelium, of the cornea, and usually heals without scarring.- Stromal keratitis occurs when the infection goes deeper into the layers of the cornea. This can lead to scarring, loss of vision and, occasionally, blindness. Stromal keratitis is thought to be caused by a late immune response to the original infection. Although the condition is rare, the NEI reports that stromal keratitis is the leading cause of corneal scarring that subsequently causes blindness in the United States.- Iridocyclitis is a serious form of eye herpes where the iris and surrounding tissues inside the eye become inflamed, causing severe sensitivity to light, blurred vision, pain and red eyes. Iridocyclitis is a type of uveitis that affects the more frontal portions of the inside of the eye.When this infection occurs in the retina or the inside lining of the back of the eye, it is known as herpes retinitis. - ... moreWhat Causes Eye Herpes?-----------------------Eye herpes is transmitted through contact with another person who is having an outbreak, or through self contact and contamination during an active herpes infection (such as a cold sore of the lip).The herpes simplex virus enters the body through the nose or mouth and travels into the nerves, where it may be inactive. The virus can remain dormant for years and may never wake up.The exact cause of an outbreak is unknown, but stress-related factors such as fever, sunburn, major dental or surgical procedures and trauma are often associated with incidents.Once the initial outbreak occurs, the NEI says untreated eye herpes has about a 40-50 percent chance of returning. There is no specific time frame for ocular herpes to reappear; it could be several weeks or even several years following the original occurrence. Although symptoms usually present themselves in only one eye, the virus possibly could affect the other eye as well. - ... more[Byline: Jessica Hill]Excerpted and edited from <http://www.allaboutvision.com/conditions/ocular-herpes.htm> - Mod.LK][It is interesting that the information about this possible outbreak is coming from a social media source.  If confirmed, this will be one of the few outbreaks thus far which have been identified through 1st hand reports on social media, further supporting efforts to include social media as information sources for disease outbreak detection.  In this case, ocular herpes is not a totally benign disease as highlighted in Mod.LK's comment above, so early detection of such an outbreak is important.  We await further information on this report. - Mod.MPP].................................................sb/lk/je/mpp"
