MPR [edited]<http://www.empr.com/idweek-2016--vaccines/questions-remain-about-possible-narcolepsy-risk-for-some-h1n1-vaccines/article/568831/>A multinational retrospective analysis failed to confirm a possible association between pediatric narcolepsy and the AS03- and MF-59-adjuvanted monovalent pandemic H1N1 vaccines, according to authors of a poster presentation at IDWeek 2016.However, geographic variation might have complicated efforts to assess such an association, and the study's statistical power for assessing risk after MF-59 vaccine was ""limited,"" they cautioned.""Overall, our results do not support an association between receipt of AS03-adjuvanted 2009 H1N1 vaccine and narcolepsy although our results are based almost exclusively on Arepanrix use in Ontario,"" Steven Black, MD of the Center for Global Health, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, in Cincinnati, OH and coauthors reported in a poster presentation.In Europe, an increased risk of narcolepsy was reported among children administered the AS03-adjuvanted 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza vaccine, but that effect might have been influenced by news ""media attention bias,"" the study authors noted.The international SOMNIA study was undertaken to evaluate the potential narcolepsy association with the AS03- and MF-59-adjuvanted monovalent pandemic H1N1 vaccines during 2003-2013. Narcolepsy incidence rates were assessed for the periods before, during, and after the pandemic influenza (A)H1N1 vaccination campaigns and a case-control analysis was undertaken to assess relative risks of narcolepsy among children and adults receiving the MF-59 and AS03 vaccines.""No changes in incidence rates of narcolepsy diagnoses were observed between the period after the start of AS03- or MF-59-containing H1N1 vaccination programs and the period before H1N1 circulation in any of the age groups or countries except for Sweden, where a steep increase was observed in children 5-19 years in 2010,"" the authors noted. ""In the primary case control analysis, no association was observed for AS03-containing vaccines in children or adults. Based on 3 exposed cases, an association with MF-59 vaccine was observed in Argentina in the primary analysis in children, but no association was found when cases from Europe were included.""The study is funded by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>[In response to the 2009 swine flu H1N1 pandemic, 2 separate pharmaceutical companies developed vaccines: Pandemrix, produced by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), and Focetria, created by Novartis. But the former vaccine was associated with an unusual increase in cases of narcolepsy; a chronic and incurable brain disorder that disrupts sleep-wake cycles and causes an array of symptoms, including overwhelming daytime sleepiness and sleep attacks that can strike at any time, even in the middle of a conversation.No such relationship was observed in populations that received Focetria, which was manufactured using a different H1N1 strain [<http://www.iflscience.com/health-and-medicine/we-may-finally-know-why-flu-vaccine-triggered-narcolepsy/>]. Pandemrix contains an oil-in-water emulsion adjuvant called ASO3. Adjuvants are substances added to a vaccine to increase the body's immune response to that vaccine [<http://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/concerns/history/narcolepsy-flu.html>]. In 2014, CDC published a study on the association between 2009 H1N1 influenza vaccines, 2010/2011 seasonal influenza vaccines, and narcolepsy. The analysis included more than 650 000 people who received the pandemic flu vaccine in 2009 and over 870 000 people who received the seasonal flu vaccine in 2010/2011. The study found that vaccination was not associated with an increased risk for narcolepsy [<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25320099>].According to a new study published in Science Translational Medicine, the vaccine triggered the generation of antibodies that targeted both the virus and a population of brain cells critical to the regulation of sleep-wake cycles. This intriguing finding supports earlier suggestions that narcolepsy may be the result of an autoimmune reaction, where the body accidentally attacks itself. These suspicions were aroused after scientists discovered that a significant portion of disease sufferers with narcolepsy accompanied by cataplexy, a condition that causes sudden episodes of muscle weakness, carry a gene variant called HLA-DQB1*0602, which codes for a receptor found on the surface of immune cells. Additionally, narcoleptics seem to generate higher levels of antibodies to pathogens following infection. Another important observation is that the brains of narcolepsy patients seem to have fewer neurons responsible for the generation of a signaling chemical called hypocretin that, when attached to its corresponding receptor, helps maintain wakefulness. Consequently, narcoleptics also have less hypocretin in their brains [<http://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2015/07/side-effect-of-flu-vaccine-yields-new-insights-into-narcolepsy.html>].Researchers from Stanford University found that a portion of one of H1N1's proteins closely resembles a portion of the hypocretin receptor. While this protein was found in both vaccines, it was present in significantly higher concentrations in Pandemrix. This led to the possibility that the antibodies generated as a result of the vaccine could be cross-reactive, attacking both their viral target and the hypocretin receptor, thereby triggering an autoimmune reaction [<http://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2015/07/side-effect-of-flu-vaccine-yields-new-insights-into-narcolepsy.html>].To evaluate this hypothesis, the researchers examined the blood of 20 individuals who developed narcolepsy following immunization with Pandemrix and compared them to 6 controls vaccinated with Focetria. Piecing together the clues, they found that 17 of those in the Pandemrix group had abnormally high levels of hypocretin receptor antibodies, whereas the controls did not. The team, therefore, proposes that in those genetically predisposed to the condition, the H1N1 protein that was present in high levels in Pandemrix, but not Focetria, successfully triggered the production of antibodies to the virus, but that these also bind to the hypocretin receptor. This could potentially initiate a targeted immune response towards the hypocretin cells, triggering their destruction and thus disrupting the regulation of sleep-wake cycles. - Mod.UBA]
