Seattle Times [edited]<http://bit.ly/2ecvQIj>Eight children in Western Washington have been hospitalized this fall [2016] with acute neurologic illnesses, and health investigators are trying to determine whether the children are suffering from an extremely rare syndrome that causes varying degrees of paralysis similar to polio.The children had a range of types and severity of symptoms, but all had a loss of strength or movement in one or more arms or legs. Doctors emphasized the syndrome is not contagious.National health experts have reported an uptick nationwide this year [2016] in acute flaccid myelitis (AFM), a syndrome that affects the nervous system -- specifically the spinal cord -- and can affect both children and adults. The Washington cases have not been confirmed as AFM but are being investigated as such.Dr. Jim Owens, a pediatric neurologist at Seattle Children's, described it as ""a body's response to common infections,"" adding, ""it's a really rare thing.""According to the state Department of Health, the exact cause of AFM is unknown. Many viruses and germs are linked to the syndrome, including common germs that can cause colds and sore throats, as well as respiratory infections. It can also be caused by poliovirus and non-polio enteroviruses, mosquito-borne viruses (including West Nile virus and Zika virus) and autoimmune conditions.The health department is leading an investigation into the cases with Public Health - Seattle & King County, Seattle Children's and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). In Washington, 3 of the children are currently hospitalized at Seattle Children's, and 5 have been released. The 1st case was seen in mid-September 2016, the latest in mid-October 2016. A 9th Washington case, in an adult, was recorded in the spring.Three of the children are from King County; one is from Pierce County; 2 are from Franklin County, and 2 are from Whatcom County. They range in age from 3-14.Nationwide, the CDC says 50 confirmed cases of AFM have been reported this year [2016] in 24 states, although it did not identify the states. Washington state had 2 cases in 2014 and none in 2015.Dr. Scott Lindquist, infectious disease epidemiologist at the state Department of Health, said he is not convinced that all 8 cases in Washington will turn out to be AFM, and, at this point, there is no evidence leading to a single source.Still, ""I am concerned,"" he said. ""To be very frank about it, it is very unusual to have a clustering of these cases so close together, and I'm concerned we don't have answers yet.""Owens, the pediatric neurologist at Seattle Children's, said the degree of recovery from AFM is ""variable,"" but that in general, patients do not fully recover from it.He said patients with the illness come in with weakness in their limbs, and an MRI typically will reveal inflammation in the spinal cord. Doctors treat it with drugs that decrease inflammation, such as steroids.It can take doctors a while to come to a diagnosis, which is why it remains unknown whether any of the 8 cases of neurologic illness in the Washington children are AFM. ""It's entirely possible none of these cases will be AFM,"" Owens said.The CDC's experts will review the Washington MRIs to determine whether they show the distinctive lesions in certain areas of the spinal cord that are characteristic of AFM.Owens said children who have the syndrome have a noticeably significant weakness in a limb, and it develops quickly, in hours or a day.""We're not talking about just a little bit of weakness; we're talking about not moving their arm at all,"" he said. ""This is extremely uncommon, and the symptoms are not subtle."" In extreme cases, AFM can cause difficulty with breathing and swallowing, he said, but it is not generally fatal.A parent who is concerned that their child is showing sudden weakness in an arm or leg should call their pediatrician's office, he said.Dr. Mark Del Beccaro, chief medical officer at Seattle Children's, sought to assure parents that it is safe to bring their children to the hospital. ""We are following our standard infection-control protocols, including putting patients with symptoms of active respiratory infections in isolation so they do not have contact with any other patients,"" he said in a statement.Owens said all of the patients who came to Children's with the symptoms developed them outside of the hospital.On its website, the CDC has expressed concern about the increase of incidents in 2016.""We know there has been an increase in these cases,"" Lindquist said. ""We were all on alert."" He described the quick identification of the cluster as a success story because it was recognized and reported so quickly by doctors at Children's.The CDC said 21 cases were reported in 2014, the 1st year that national reporting of the syndrome began. Reporting of AFM is voluntary in most states, so it is difficult to interpret trends, the CDC said, but greater awareness among health-care providers may be one reason for the uptick.Owens said a group of cases occurred in the intermountain region of the Western U.S., near Colorado, in 2014, and the CDC raised awareness among physicians to begin looking for the syndrome and reporting it.The CDC recommends that children and adults be up to date on vaccinations, avoid being bitten by mosquitoes, and wash hands often.[Byline: Katherine Long]--Communicated by:Chris Noell <cnoell801@gmail.com>andProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>
