HealthDay News [edited]<https://consumer.healthday.com/public-health-information-30/poisons-health-news-537/some-mexican-ceramics-can-serve-up-lead-poisoning-715978.html>A charming ceramic reminder of a Mexican vacation could end up giving you lead poisoning, a new study warns. Exposure to high concentrations of lead, often found in glazes that line traditional Mexican ceramics, cookware and dishware, can be toxic after extended periods of handling, Canadian researchers report.The issue has long been on the radar of public health professionals, but was highlighted recently by the lead poisoning of a 55-year-old Canadian woman. She frequently used ceramic dishware picked up in Mexico. ""Every time she poured hot water into her mug, lead was seeping out of the glaze and into her tea,"" explained study lead author Dr Michael Fralick. He's a general internist at the University of Toronto and a research fellow in pharmacoepidemiology at Harvard University.According to the case report, the woman had been repeatedly hospitalized for unexplained but severe abdominal pain following prolonged use of ceramics purchased in Mexico. Tests revealed that the glaze on both the inner and outer surfaces of the cookware, which she used to cook, boil water, and eat and drink from, contained 17 percent lead. As a result, her blood lead concentrations were nearly 36 times the upper limit of what is considered ""normal,"" Fralick's team said. The researchers described the case in the [17 Oct 2016] issue of the Canadian Medical Association Journal.Aside from abdominal pain, lead poisoning caused the woman to suffer anemia, joint pain, and extreme fatigue. However, after spotting the underlying cause for her abdominal pain, the patient and her son were told to stop using the Mexican wares. Over the course of the following 3 months, the poisoning symptoms cleared up.Fralick stressed that occasional exposure to lead-laced ceramics would be unlikely to pose a problem. ""Lead is toxic even in small amounts,"" he said, ""but the most common way lead poisoning occurs is through long-term daily exposure to lead. If you were to eat a meal off a plate containing lead, it would be extremely unlikely to cause any problems, unless you were continuing to eat off this plate daily for a very long time.""Most lead-tainted cookware is imported by tourists, Fralick added, because ""the [commercial] importation of cookware and glassware containing lead into North America is tightly regulated.""On the other hand, ""it is nearly impossible to tell if a dish has lead in it just by looking at it,"" Fralick said, so ""tourists may bring back lead-containing cookware or pottery unknowingly. This is particularly a problem for cookware from Mexico, China, and other countries."" His advice: ""if you are going to travel to Mexico, don't plan on buying cookware while you are there.""Dr Bruce Lanphear is a professor of health sciences at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver. He agreed that the issue isn't confined to Mexico. ""China and other countries across Southeast Asia are often times a major source of lead contaminant, particularly in terms of paints,"" Lanphear said. However, ""Mexico does appear to have a particular problem for ceramics, because often the glaze used has very, very high concentrations of lead -- as much as 75 percent."" Labeling may not be accurate, Lanphear added. ""Even though some ceramics sold in Mexico will be marked 'no lead,' I would say that is not an official certification,"" he said.None of this means that you can't buy Mexican ceramics just to display. ""If you want to purchase pottery in Mexico, that's fine,"" Lanphear said. ""I have, and I have it displayed in my home today. I just wouldn't use it for eating.""[Byline: Alan Mozes]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The formal citation of the publication is: Fralick M, Thomspson A, Mourad O: Lead toxicity from glazed ceramic cookware. CMAJ. 2016 Oct 17. pii: cmaj.160182. [Epub ahead of print]. The following moderation was written by my colleague Mod.TG:Lead is a heavy metal that can be toxic to living bodies, humans, and animals, in certain high levels. Lead can be found in paints on houses, on pottery, and other objects. Lead can be found in water, in air around smelters, and in such objects as batteries.When lead enters the body, generally through ingestion but also through inhalation from dust and lead smelters, it may be seen as a lead line on the metaphysis of growing bones in radiographs.Lead can be especially detrimental to children as many tissues are growing and developing and lead is easy incorporated into those cells. It may slow growth, cause hearing problems, hyperactivity, and behavior changes. Children with high lead burdens may have neurological damage, including brain damage. This may present as headaches or learning difficulties, muscle cramps, twitches, or spasms. It may be more severe, leading to seizures and death.Adults may also suffer from lead poisoning. Adults may experience a variety of neurological problems, among them, memory, and concentration problems. They may also have muscle and joint pain, reproductive problems, and hypertension (high blood pressure). Adults may also suffer from neurological problems as well.Heavy metal intoxication almost always affects the gastrointestinal system, such as diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, poor appetite, and as a consequence, weight loss. Anemia may also be seen in lead poisoning, which further increases the weakness the victim experiences.Lead has no known physiological function in the body. It can be tested for in the blood, but chelators are necessary to help eliminate the metal from the body. Effective chelators include dimercapterol and succiimer. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/260>.]
