CNN [edited]<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/01/health/acute-flaccid-myelitis-afm-death/index.html>The death of a 6-year-old [child] on Sun [30 Oct 2016] is the very 1st to be linked to a mysterious illness cropping up across the country. His parents of Washington state, told CNN affiliate KOMO that they first took their son to the hospital because he had symptoms of a cold and was feeling dizzy. Within hours, they said, he was paralyzed, and never recovered.State officials are investigating a ""potential cluster"" of acute flaccid myelitis, a highly infectious polio-like disease that primarily strikes children. Like polio, AFM affects the body's nervous system - specifically the spinal cord - and can cause lifelong paralysis. But unlike with polio, there is no vaccine.Though doctors suspect that [the child] had AFM, a spokeswoman for the Washington State Department of Health said an official diagnosis has not been confirmed.A total of 8 other cases are under investigation in Washington: 2 have been confirmed as AFM, and 7 are still being evaluated. Up to 5 children have been treated at hospitals and released, while 3 remain hospitalized, according to a spokeswoman for Seattle Children's Hospital. Citing confidentiality, neither the health department nor the hospital would say whether the 2 confirmed cases are among the patients who remain hospitalized.On Tue [1 Nov 2016], the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released the national AFM case count from September, which indicates a sharp increase in the confirmed cases this year [2016]. From 1 Jan to 30 Sep , 89 people in 33 states were diagnosed with AFM, 37 of them in September. [Byline: Ben Tinker]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Although only 2 of these cases in Washington state have been confirmed as AFM, it is concerning that cases of AFM apparently increased so sharply in the US in 2016. Since it is not a reportable condition, exact numbers are not clear, but CDC presents a figure with known case numbers for 2014, 2015, 2016 (<http://www.cdc.gov/acute-flaccid-myelitis/afm-surveillance.html>). While the total AFM case count for 2016 is less than the 2014 case count, CDC is concerned about the increase in cases from May to September, possibly longer in 2016. They are intensifying efforts to understand the cause and risk factors of AFM. Causes of AFM include such viruses as enteroviruses, arboviruses (e.g., West Nile virus (WNV), Japanese encephalitis virus and Saint Louis encephalitis virus among others in the same family), and adenoviruses.A map of Washington State, United States, can be found at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/248>. - Mod.LK]******[2] Responses to ProMED mail Acute flaccid myelitis - North America (06): USA causes, RFI 20161101.4598660Date: Wed 2 Nov 2016Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited]The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has received an increased number of reports of acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) from May through August 2016 compared to the same period in 2015. They are encouraging clinicians to be alert for cases of AFM among all age groups and to report suspect cases of AFM to their local health department. Reporting of cases will help states and CDC monitor the occurrence of AFM and better understand factors possibly associated with this illness. Background----------AFM is a condition that affects the nervous system which can result from a variety of causes including viral infections. Following the increased number of reports of AFM among children that were received by the CDC from August - October 2014, CDC has been conducting surveillance for AFM to better understand the etiology, risk factors, preventive measures, and potential therapies for this syndrome. From 1 Jan 2016 through 31 Jul 2016, CDC received 49 reports of suspected AFM in people from 24 U.S. states: 32 met the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) case definition for confirmed AFM and 5 were classified as probable. During the same period in 2015, CDC received 10 reports of suspected AFM, of which 7 were classified as confirmed. Among the 32 confirmed cases reported in 2016, median age was 5 years (range, 5 months - 18 years). Dates of onset for confirmed cases ranged from 19 Jan through 31 Jul 2016: 78 percent (25/32) had onset of limb weakness after 1 May 2016. Pleocytosis was present in 81.2 percent (26/32) of confirmed AFM cases with a median CSF cell count of 45/mm3 (range, 6-1460/mm3). To date, no single pathogen has been consistently detected in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), respiratory specimens, stool, or blood at either CDC or state laboratories. Reports from the New Jersey Department of Health noted that since 1 Jan 2016, they received 8 reports of suspected AFM: 4 met the CSTE case definition for a confirmed case, 1 was classified as probable, 1 was determined to not be a case, and 2 cases are pending case classification. Among reported suspect cases, 75 percent (6/8) had onset of limb weakness after 1 Aug 2016. Among the 4 confirmed cases reported in 2016, the median age was 6 years (range, 2 - 19 years).Recommendations---------------Report suspect cases to the state health department that meet the following clinical criteria:An illness with onset of acute focal limb weakness, AND either:- cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with pleocytosis (white blood cell count more than 5 cells/mm3), OR- a MRI showing spinal cord lesions largely restricted to gray matter and spanning one or more spinal segments (terms in the spinal cord MRI report such as ""affecting mostly gray matter,"" ""affecting the anterior horn or anterior horn cells,"" ""affecting the central cord,"" ""anterior myelitis,"" or ""poliomyelitis"" would all be consistent with this terminology).If AFM is suspected, specimens should be obtained as early as possible after onset of limb weakness. Specimens to be collected include CSF, upper respiratory tract specimens, blood, serum, and stool. Guidance on clinical specimens can be found here: <http://www.cdc.gov/acute-flaccid-myelitis/hcp/instructions.html>.When reporting suspect cases of AFM, providers will be requested to complete the CDC AFM Patient Summary Form, which can be found here: <http://www.cdc.gov/acute-flaccid-myelitis/hcp/data.html>.For New Jersey, this form, along with copies of spinal cord and brain MRI reports, should be submitted directly to NJDOH. The information will then be used by NJDOH, in consultation with CDC, for determination of case status. The NJDOH will notify local health departments of any reported suspect AFM cases within their jurisdiction and may request assistance with obtaining any necessary follow up information.Additional information----------------------Since August 2016, the California Department of Public Health has reported a statewide increase in acute flaccid myelitis. From 1 Jan 2016 through 30 Sep 2016, 24 AFM cases (15 confirmed, 9 probable) were reported to the health department. Of those cases, 6 had a concomitant enterovirus infection (4 were EV-D68). The current case classification being used includes: confirmed-an illness with onset of acute focal limb weakness AND an MRI showing spinal cord lesion largely restricted to gray matter and spanning one or more spinal segments. Probable cases include both an illness with onset of acute focal limb weakness AND CSF showing pleocytosis (white blood cell count more than 5 cells/mm3).Texas has seen 11 confirmed cases and 2 suspected cases of AFM so far in 2016. The last case reported was in August 2016, no new cases have been reported as of 9 Oct  2016. Of the 11 confirmed cases, 5 occurred in Collin, Dallas, Denton, and Tarrant counties. Health officials in Texas have encouraged clinicians to voluntarily report suspected AFM cases; it still is not a reportable illness nation-wide.--Communicated by:EpiCore Surveillance Project member Mandy McBroom-ZahnUT Southwestern Medical CenterTexasDate: Wed 26 Oct 2016Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited]Felicia Chow, MD, MAS (Assistant Professor, Neurology and Medicine, Infectious Diseases, University of California, San Francisco, CA) reviewing Messacar K et al. Acute flaccid myelitis: A clinical review of US cases 2012-2015. Ann Neurol 2016 Sep; 80:326.Evidence supports the biological plausibility of enterovirus D68 as an etiologic agent--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------To summarize clinical features of the recent uptick in acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) cases in the U.S., researchers reviewed all English language reports between 1 Jan 2012 and 1 Jul 2016 of acute flaccid paralysis with radiographic or electrophysiologic evidence of spinal cord gray matter/anterior horn cell disease. Cases came from California (n=59), Colorado (n=12), and Utah (n=11) and from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention surveillance data (n=120, 43 of whom were included in the other cohorts).Most cases occurred in previously healthy children. A febrile respiratory or gastrointestinal prodrome was common before the rapid onset of neurologic symptoms. Limb weakness was frequently asymmetric and sensory involvement variable. Some patients had cranial nerve and bowel/bladder dysfunction. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) evaluation typically demonstrated a mild-to-moderate lymphocyte-predominant pleocytosis with elevated protein. Magnetic resonance imaging showed primarily non-contrast-enhancing signal abnormalities in the spinal cord gray matter or cranial nerve nuclei, sometimes with cord edema. Electrodiagnostics revealed motor neuropathy or neuronopathy in affected limbs. Most patients had persistent motor deficits at follow-up despite empiric immunomodulatory therapies, including intravenous immune globulin. Enterovirus D68 in CSF was identified in just 1 patient (with bloody CSF), whereas it was found in respiratory specimens in up to 47 percent of cases with available specimens. Clinical presentation overlapped with other neurologic causes of acute limb weakness (e.g., acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy), although various features distinguish AFM from these syndromes.Comment-------These cases are similar to established enteroviral causes of acute flaccid paralysis, lending biological plausibility to enterovirus D68 as a potential etiologic agent of AFM. Epidemiological data support an association between the 2014 D68 outbreak and concurrent rise in U.S. AFM cases. However, definitive evidence linking enterovirus D68 with AFM is lacking.Whether AFM represents an active infection or postinfectious process is uncertain; therefore, use of immunomodulatory therapy remains controversial and should be approached with caution. Research efforts should prioritize elucidating the association between enterovirus D68 and AFM, evaluating alternative approaches to identify neuroinvasive infection, and exploring novel antiviral therapies with activity against D68.--Communicated by:EpiCore Surveillance Project member Jessica Kumar [ProMED thanks its readers for submitting these informative comments in response to the RFI on AFM - Mod.LK][A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/248>.]
