PLoS (Public Library of Science) Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005101>Ref: Weger-Lucarelli J, RÌ ckert C, Chotiwan N, et al: Vector competence of American mosquitoes for 3 strains of Zika virus. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Oct 26; 10(10): e0005101----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------In 2015, Zika virus (ZIKV; _Flaviviridae_; _Flavivirus_) emerged in the Americas, causing millions of infections in dozens of countries. The rapid spread of the virus and the association with disease outcomes such as Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome and microcephaly make understanding transmission dynamics essential. Currently, there are no reports of vector competence (VC) of American mosquitoes for ZIKV isolates from the Americas. Further, it is not clear whether ZIKV strains from other genetic lineages can be transmitted by American _Aedes aegypti_ populations, and whether the scope of the current epidemic is in part facilitated by viral factors such as enhanced replicative fitness or increased vector competence. Therefore, we characterized replication of 3 ZIKV strains, one from each of the 3 phylogenetic clades in several cell lines and assessed their abilities to be transmitted by _Ae. aegypti_ mosquitoes. Additionally, laboratory colonies of different _Culex_ spp were infected with an American outbreak strain of ZIKV to assess VC. Replication rates were variable and depended on virus strain, cell line and MOI [multiplicity of infection]. African strains used in this study outcompeted the American strain in vitro in both mammalian and mosquito cell culture. West and East African strains of ZIKV tested here were more efficiently transmitted by _Ae. aegypti_ from Mexico than was the currently circulating American strain of the Asian lineage. Long-established laboratory colonies of _Culex_ mosquitoes were not efficient ZIKV vectors. These data demonstrate the capacity for additional ZIKV strains to infect and replicate in American _Aedes_ mosquitoes and suggest that neither enhanced virus replicative fitness nor virus adaptation to local vector mosquitoes seems likely to explain the extent and intensity of ZIKV transmission in the Americas.Author summary--------------The mechanisms contributing to the explosive nature of the current ZIKV outbreak in the Americas are poorly understood. Therefore, we characterized the replication of 3 strains, one from each phylogenetic clade of ZIKV and evaluated virus strain differences in transmission efficiency by American mosquitoes. Our results suggest that the strain currently circulating in the Americas does not have unusually high infectivity for American _Ae. aegypti_ as compared to the African strains used in this study. Colonized _Culex_ mosquitoes were inefficient vectors. In vitro data suggested slower replication and decreased fitness for the currently circulating American strain compared to African strains isolated decades ago. Therefore, viral adaptation to local mosquitoes does not appear, at present, to be driving the current ZIKV outbreak in the Americas.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[This study reinforces the role of _Aedes aegypti_ as the main ZIKV vector. It adds additional evidence that _Culex_ mosquitoes are not efficient vectors of the virus. This corresponds to results of at least 2 other studies, but is in conflict with the results of one other study that found _Culex quinquefasciatus_ to be efficient. The colonized _Culex_ mosquitoes used in the study above were: _Culex (Cx.) quinquefasciatus_ Say, _Culex (Cx.) pipiens_ [L.], and _Culex (Cx.) tarsalis_ Coquillett. The question remains if colonization affects vector transmission efficiency or not. - Mod.TY]******[3] Testicular damage, miceDate: Mon 31 Oct 2016Source: Nature journal [edited]<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaap/ncurrent/full/nature20556.html>Ref: Govero J, Esakky P, Scheaffer SM, et al: Zika virus infection damages the testes in mice. Nature. 2016. doi: 10.1038/nature20556----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------Zika virus (ZIKV) infection of pregnant women can cause congenital malformations including microcephaly, which has focused global attention on this emerging pathogen. In addition to transmission by mosquitoes, ZIKV can be detected in the seminal fluid of affected males for extended periods of time and transmitted sexually. Here, using a mouse-adapted African ZIKV strain (Dakar 41519), we evaluated the consequences of infection in the male reproductive tract of mice. We observed persistence of ZIKV, but not the closely related dengue virus (DENV), in the testis and epididymis of male mice, and this was associated with tissue injury that caused diminished testosterone and inhibin B levels, and oligospermia. ZIKV preferentially infected spermatogonia, primary spermatocytes, and Sertoli cells in the testis, resulting in cell death and destruction of the seminiferous tubules. Less damage was observed with a contemporary Asian ZIKV strain (H/PF/2013), in part because this virus replicates less efficiently in mice. The extent to which these observations in mice translate to humans remains unclear, but longitudinal studies of sperm function and viability in ZIKV-infected humans seem warranted.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary MarshallandRoland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>******[4] Microcephaly: numbers gapDate: Mon 31 Oct 2016Source: The New York Times [edited]<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/01/health/colombia-zika-microcephaly.html?>Barranquilla, Colombia, a tropical city on the Caribbean coast may hold the answer to one of the deeper mysteries of the Zika epidemic: Why has the world's 2nd-largest outbreak, after Brazil's, produced so few birth defects?In Brazil, more than 2000 babies have been born with microcephaly, abnormally small heads and brain damage caused by the Zika virus. In Colombia, officials had predicted there might be as many as 700 such babies by the end of this year [2016]. There have been merely 47.The gap has been seen all over the Americas. According to the World Health Organization, the United States has 28 cases -- almost all linked to women infected elsewhere. Guatemala has 15, and Martinique has 12.Had the rest of the Americas been as affected as northeastern Brazil, a tidal wave of microcephaly would be washing over the region. Most experts say that will not happen, but they are at a loss as to why.Discovering what stopped microcephaly in Colombia may help other countries tamp down the epidemic's worst effects.There are some obvious differences between Colombia's epidemic and Brazil's. The population here is less than a quarter that of Brazil, and almost half of its residents live at higher altitudes, where mosquitoes are rarer.And Zika circulated silently for much longer in Brazil. The virus arrived there by early 2014, and not in Colombia until late 2015. Having just fought a severe chikungunya epidemic in 2014, Colombia was more ready than Brazil to send forth the anti-mosquito battalions.But all that does not seem sufficient to explain the disparity. Increasingly, there is evidence for 2 other possibilities.Pregnant women here, alerted to the tragedy unfolding in Brazil, may have sought abortions in greater numbers, officials say. Others seem to have heeded the government's controversial advice to delay pregnancy altogether.Dr Miguel Parra-Saavedra, the director of maternal-fetal medicine at the Cedifetal Clinic in Barranquilla and one of the country's leading high-risk pregnancy specialists, is among the experts who suspect many pregnant women in Colombia, alarmed by news reports, sought ultrasounds and aborted deformed fetuses. Some of his own patients have done so.Dr Parra-Saavedra heads a study of Zika-related birth defects in cooperation with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In the course of the research thus far, he has diagnosed 13 cases of fetal microcephaly. 4 of the mothers terminated their pregnancies immediately, he said. Another 4, and possibly a 5th, sought abortions but were turned down by their health insurance companies. Only 4 patients, Dr Parra-Saavedra said, deliberately chose to have their babies.Among those who tried to have an abortion was a 37-year-old mother of 2 healthy daughters. When she and her husband, 47, an unemployed mine-machinery operator, learned that their unborn daughter was microcephalic, they requested what is here called ""pregnancy interruption.""Abortion is legal in Colombia to protect a mother's health, and the health ministry considers a severely deformed baby a threat to maternal mental well-being.But [the woman -- who asked that the couple names not be used because some relatives opposed abortion] -- was already 31 weeks pregnant. While the abortion law does not specify which week is too late, her insurer balked, she said, saying it needed time to decide whether to pay for the procedure.""There were papers and papers to fill out, and the company didn't say no and didn't say yes,"" she recalled. ""They said, 'We'll call you later.'""""They never did -- and then it was too late. I had to have the baby."" She spoke as she nursed her newborn daughter. Standing behind her, Dr William O Contreras, a neurosurgeon, said in English that [the baby] had no frontal lobes and that the connection between her 2 brain hemispheres was abnormally small. ""When this happens,"" he said, ""there is no intelligence, no coordination, no attention, no initiative, no calculation -- and no memories at all.""Dr Fernando Ruiz, Colombia's vice minister for public health, also says that it is ""very possible"" that abortions lowered the microcephaly rate here.""Colombia has some of the most progressive laws and regulations in South America,"" he said in an interview. With gynecologists alert to the threat, he said, many women had ultrasounds early enough to made decisions.Even a very small increase in the abortion rate could account for a sharp reduction in microcephaly.Just 320 legal abortions were officially reported in Colombia in 2011, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a New York-based research organization supporting abortion rights. Yet the institute estimates that there actually were 400 400 abortions each year in Colombia.In this country, most abortions are not performed in clinics by vacuum aspiration, but are induced by misoprostol, a drug that causes strong contractions, said Dr Guido Parra Anaya, the director of the Procrear assisted fertility clinic in Barranquilla. Any doctor can prescribe the drug, and none are legally obligated to report it.Misoprostol also is commonly given out by illegal providers here, according to the Guttmacher Institute. Frequently, women are told to take the pills and go to a hospital when heavy bleeding starts, as if they had had a miscarriage. Colombian hospitals treat an estimated 93 000 women a year for postabortion complications.In July [2016], Dr Martha Lucia Ospina, the director of Colombia's National Institutes of Health, reported that fetal deaths reported as miscarriages on death certificates had increased by 8 percent. The numbers have begun returning to normal only recently.In Brazil, by contrast, abortion is permitted only in cases of rape or incest or to save the mother's life, and illegal abortions are hard to get because the police, under pressure from evangelical Christians in Brazil's Congress, began cracking down on clandestine clinics a decade ago. Also, because the microcephaly surge in Brazil appeared with no warning, even women who might have risked illegal abortions had no time to receive ultrasounds.In Colombia, women now normally have 3 ultrasounds during a pregnancy. The increased screening has made for hard choices.Microcephaly can also be caused by other viruses or genetic mutations, but the Zika virus causes unprecedented levels of brain damage.""In my 22 years as an ultrasound physician, I have never seen microcephaly like this,"" Dr Parra-Saavedra said. ""The heads are much smaller, to a severe degree.""Although pockets of dead cells that foreshadow microcephaly may appear earlier, fetal heads do not become unmistakably small until early in the 3rd trimester.Health insurers, financially struggling here, are reluctant to approve late abortions because they must pay for neonatal intensive care if the child is born alive.For mothers, the diagnosis is understandably difficult. By the 3rd trimester, fetuses on ultrasounds look much like newborn babies, not like embryos.The 1st scans of another woman's son were normal. By the time his microcephaly was evident, she was in her 7th month and could see his face clearly.""The gynecologist said I could terminate, and I cried,"" said [the 18-year-old], who looks 15. ""It was very hard because the baby was so big. My husband and I decided to keep him. I am hoping for a miracle.""Colombia's Zika epidemic peaked in February [2016] and was declared over in late July. Many women who became pregnant during that time are still due to give birth, so more microcephaly cases may appear.But they will still be far fewer than originally predicted.Dr Ruiz said that based on Brazil's experience, he had expected to see 700 cases of Zika-related microcephaly this year [2016]. Now, he expects 100-250 at most.In December [2015], Dr Ruiz asked women in Colombia to delay pregnancies, and he says he believes many did so, although he cannot prove it yet.A drop in the birthrate would indicate that many women heeded the advice, but the national health statistics office takes 18 months to tally up each year's birthrate.In some Latin American countries, suggestions from health ministers that women delay pregnancy met harsh resistance -- both from the Roman Catholic Church and from women's groups complaining that there was too little access to contraception.El Salvador faced a backlash when it asked women to stop having children for 2 years. But Colombia's health ministry asked women to delay for only 6-8 months while officials watched how the epidemic unfolded. Some women found that sensible.As her husband, a police officer, and her young son watched, a [27-year-old woman] explained how she happened to be getting a 4-month ultrasound in September [2016]. She originally planned to become pregnant last December [2015], she said, ""but they said, 'Please wait 6 months.' So I waited till May, when they said it looked safe again.""How many women followed her example will not be known for some time.The epidemic appears to be winding down in much of Latin America as the hottest, rainiest months end and as more people, having been bitten, develop immunity.Some experts thought it might have been premature to declare the epidemic over in Colombia, because the virus had infected less than 1 percent of the population. In French Polynesia, it infected more than 60 percent before cases disappeared.A study done by scientists at London's Imperial College estimated that across Latin America, where the geography is far more diverse than on Pacific islands, it may be 2-3 years before widespread immunity stops the epidemic.In places like Puerto Rico, where the virus arrived relatively late, microcephaly cases are expected to keep increasing. The 1st live birth of a child with Zika-related microcephaly was reported last month [September 2016].[Byline: Donald G. McNeil Jr, Julia Symmes Cobb]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report provides an interesting discussion of the differences in incidence of microcephaly between Brazil and Colombia. Interestingly, Ernesto Marques, an epidemiologist at the University of Pittsburgh postulates that the Zika virus may not be acting alone to cause teratogenic effects in Brazil, but the virus may have an accomplice. A question about the accuracy of case numbers has also been raised. Claudio Maierovitch, a former senior Brazilian health official responsible for monitoring Zika when the epidemic started, said that the figure was probably an undercount and that around 500 cases of microcephaly a year pre-Zika would be a more accurate number. A big problem in determining whether Brazil has a higher rate of Zika-related birth defects is that no one is sure how many people were infected by the virus in 2015, when it was little known and widely confused with dengue. ""The fact is we don't have any idea how many cases there were,"" said Maierovitch, meaning it's possible Brazil's birth-defect totals could simply be a reflection of a Zika outbreak that was far more pervasive than anywhere else. (<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/the_americas/scientists-are-bewildered-by-zikas-path-across-latin-america/2016/10/25/5e3a992c-9614-11e6-9cae-2a3574e296a6_story.html>. A report sent in by Roland HÌ bner). The report above also puts a human face on the dilemma that women and their families face in confronting fetuses with teratogenic effects, and deciding to terminate their pregnancies or continue them to term with the corresponding need to provide care of their offspring that may last many years. - Mod.TY]******[5] Congenital Zika syndromeDate: Thu 3 Nov 2016Source: JAMA Pediatrics [edited]<http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/fullarticle/2579543>Ref: Moore CA, Staples JE, Dobyns WB, et al: Characterizing the pattern of anomalies in congenital Zika syndrome for pediatric clinicians. JAMA Pediatr. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.3982----------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract--------Importance. Zika virus infection can be prenatally passed from a pregnant woman to her fetus. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that intrauterine Zika virus infection is a cause of microcephaly and serious brain anomalies, but the full spectrum of anomalies has not been delineated. To inform pediatric clinicians who may be called on to evaluate and treat affected infants and children, we review the most recent evidence to better characterize congenital Zika syndrome.Observations. We reviewed published reports of congenital anomalies occurring in fetuses or infants with presumed or laboratory-confirmed intrauterine Zika virus infection. We conducted a comprehensive search of the English literature using Medline and EMBASE for Zika from inception through 30 Sep 2016. Congenital anomalies were considered in the context of the presumed pathogenetic mechanism related to the neurotropic properties of the virus. We conclude that congenital Zika syndrome is a recognizable pattern of structural anomalies and functional disabilities secondary to central and, perhaps, peripheral nervous system damage. Although many of the components of this syndrome, such as cognitive, sensory, and motor disabilities, are shared by other congenital infections, there are 5 features that are rarely seen with other congenital infections or are unique to congenital Zika virus infection: (1) severe microcephaly with partially collapsed skull; (2) thin cerebral cortices with subcortical calcifications; (3) macular scarring and focal pigmentary retinal mottling; (4) congenital contractures; and (5) marked early hypertonia and symptoms of extrapyramidal involvement.Conclusions and relevance. Although the full spectrum of adverse reproductive outcomes caused by Zika virus infection is not yet determined, a distinctive phenotype -- the congenital Zika syndrome --has emerged. Recognition of this phenotype by clinicians for infants and children can help ensure appropriate etiologic evaluation and comprehensive clinical investigation to define the range of anomalies in an affected infant as well as determine essential follow-up and ongoing care.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[The distinctive phenotype of congenital Zika syndrome may be of value to clinicians attending patients in areas of active Zika virus transmission. - Mod.TY]
