Medscape [edited]<http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/871233>An epidemiologic investigation into the recent outbreak of elizabethkingia infection in Wisconsin underscores the importance of statewide infection surveillance systems and highlights challenges faced by epidemiologists trying to track down the source of such rare infections.""This is the largest reported outbreak of elizabethkingia infections, and the source of the outbreak strain of _Elizabethkingia anophelis_ remains unknown,"" said Lina Elbadawi, MD, from the Bureau of Communicable Diseases at the Wisconsin Division of Public Health in Madison and the Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dr Elbadawi described the epidemiologic investigation conducted by the Wisconsin Division of Public Health and CDC here at IDWeek 2016 in New Orleans._Elizabethkingia anophelis_ is a rare, aerobic Gram negative bacillus that can be isolated in soil, water, and sink drains. It is intrinsically multidrug-resistant and opportunistic and causes severe infections in people who have underlying medical conditions. The 3 species associated with human illness -- _E. anophelis_, _E. meningoseptica_, and _E. miricola_ -- are hard to distinguish phenotypically.On 5 Jan 2016, the Wisconsin Division of Public Health notified CDC that 6 _E. anophelis_ bloodstream infections had been identified in residents of 4 counties in the preceding 13 days. The isolates had indistinguishable patterns on pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGD), and CDC confirmed them to be _E. anophelis_. A joint investigation ensued, during which many more cases emerged.Infection preventionists and clinical laboratories began to watch for cases involving elizabethkingia and its former genera, _Flavobacterium_ and _Chryseobacterium_. In searching for other clusters, epidemiologists looked at neighboring states, the nationwide Emerging Infections Network, and other programs in which outbreaks have been described.""Rapidly established statewide retrospective and prospective surveillance techniques were critical to case-finding efforts,"" Dr Elbadawi explained. An isolate of _E. anophelis_ from any clinical specimen collected on or after 1 Nov 2015 with a PFGD pattern matching that of the outbreak was considered to be a case. The outbreak was found to be characterized by tight geographic clustering, community onset, and occurrence in older adults with comorbidities.The medical records of each case-patient were reviewed to identify all healthcare encounters in the 30 days before collection of the 1st positive specimen. A Charlson comorbidity score was assigned to each patient, and epidemiologists interviewed each patient or a proxy about community exposures and potential sources and modes of transmission. ""We tested numerous potential community-associated and healthcare-associated sources,"" reported Dr Elbadawi. Sources of interest included, but were not limited to, personal contacts, animals, personal-care products (such as lotions, shampoos, and oral care products), food, water, the facility in which the patient resided, and environmental factors.The clinical isolates underwent extensive laboratory testing. Water and other environmental samples were cultured, as were medical and personal care products. For the household and healthcare contacts of each patient, cultures were taken at several sites on the body.The vast majority of the infections appeared to have occurred in the 2 month period from February to April 2016. 63 case-patients lived in 12 south eastern Wisconsin counties, and 3 lived in neighboring states.The median age of the Wisconsin case-patients was 77 years (range 19-101); 56 per cent were male, and the median Charlson score was 3.5 (range 3-5). Most initial specimens were collected at the patients' private residences (75 per cent), but 13 per cent were collected in assisted-living facilities, 6 per cent in long term care facilities, and 6 per cent in acute care facilities. In most of the initial positive specimens (89 per cent), the isolate was identified in the blood. In the Wisconsin cohort, 34 per cent of the infections were associated with soft tissue, 33 per cent with the lungs, and 13 per cent with the urinary tract; 5 per cent of the case-patients showed no evidence of infection. Sequelae were often serious, and 29 per cent of the patients died, possibly as a result of the infection.Case-patients had encounters at 47 healthcare facilities, but no facility had more than 7 encounters in common with another facility, which eliminates any one facility as the cause of infection. Municipal water, which came from 27 different systems, was used by 80 per cent of the patients.Surveillance cultures from 15 household contacts and 182 healthcare contacts were negative for _E. anophelis_. In the 30 days before specimen collection, most patients had at least one healthcare exposure; 43 per cent of these were hospital admissions, and 14 per cent were for hemodialysis. No common intravenous medications or compounded products were identified.The investigators analyzed 31 personal-care products, 38 water samples, and 61 water-associated biofilm swabs from 12 residences and assisted-living facilities. At 5 acute care facilities, they sampled water and sink drains. All healthcare and personal-care products, tap water, and water-associated biofilm samples tested negative for the outbreak strain of _E. anophelis_, with the exception of one sample of tub water that contained bedding from an infected patient.""All 41 medical products we tested were also culture-negative for _E. anophelis_,"" Dr Elbadawi reported. These included alcohol swabs, single-exposure products, and products related to dialysis and other procedures. ""Food history interviews did not identify any food reported more frequently than expected,"" she said, ""and there was no common food distributor among 5 long-term care facilities and no common personal-care products or brands identified among the majority of patients.""A number of factors that limited the search for answers highlight the challenges faced by investigators of outbreaks. ""The high case fatality rate and advanced age of the patients required broad use of proxy interviews, and recall was a limitation among surviving patients,"" said Dr Elbadawi. ""Also, among the earliest cases, prolonged time from diagnosis to the completion of the interview made it hard to ascertain exposure. Despite extensive data and the numerous means used to collect it, we were also unable to determine the incubation interval for these illnesses, which has been a challenge during previous elizabethkingia investigations as well,"" she added.""I applaud the efforts of these investigators trying to get to the bottom of this relatively rare disease,"" said Scott Fridkin, MD, senior advisor in the Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion at CDC. ""They approached it from many directions, but it's relatively rare, and there is difficulty with recall of exposures.""The case fatality rate is high largely because this organism infects mostly people with chronic and recurrent illnesses. They ""go in and out of the healthcare setting"", which makes it hard to pinpoint sources, he told Medscape Medical News. ""It may also be a community-based disease.""[byline: Caroline Helwick]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[At this point, there have been no new cases for several months, and no clear source of the organism was found. It would be interesting to know what the geographical pattern of the outbreak was over time. Only time will tell whether this coming winter will see a recurrence of the organism, as cases began to be recognized during this month, November, in 2015. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/250>.]
