The New Indian Express [edited]<http://www.newindianexpress.com/states/odisha/2016/nov/10/je-shots-useless-as-aes-soars-1536938.html>It may sound surprising but mass vaccination will not be able to put a check on rising child deaths in Malkangiri district [Odisha state]. The vaccination, which is likely to be started from 1st week of December [2016], is to prevent only the vectorborne Japanese encephalitis (JE) and will have no impact on the soaring acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) cases.It is not JE but the deadly AES which has claimed more lives in the tribal dominated district. Unfortunately, neither any vaccine nor medicine is available for AES, which is a group of clinical neurologic manifestations caused by wide range of viruses, bacteria, fungi and parasites.So far, of 85 deaths registered in Malkangiri [now up to 90 - Mod.TY], JE accounts for only 30 while 55 children have died of AES in the past 61 days. The reports indicate that of total 313 cases, 161 children have been diagnosed with AES and the rest with JE. Sources said 33 children, mostly affected with AES, are undergoing treatment at the district headquarters hospital.On the other hand, non-availability of vaccine and medicine for AES, the major cause of child deaths, has put the health administration in a fix. Director of health services Dr Kailash Chandra Dash admitted that a spurt in AES cases is a global concern: ""There are many AES causing viruses for which no vaccine or medicine is available. Medicine for only herpes virus is available and several affected children in Malkangiri have been treated for the disease,"" he said.In many cases, children affected with AES suffer from brain aspiration and edema which develops due to an inflammatory reaction. Both are life threatening and if such cases are not treated early and properly, the chance of survival of the patient is remote. ""That's why we are alerting people to be cautious. Early detection and treatment are 2 possible methods to put a check on it. Since there is no particular medicine for the disease, we are adopting symptomatic treatment with supportive ventilator and regular monitoring of glucose level of patients,"" Dash said.The health officials, however, claimed that JE vaccine is also not foolproof as it fails to provide 100 per cent protection. The states which were covered under the vaccine in the last few years have achieved 60 to 70 per cent results. ""We have no other option but to rely on it and focus on treatment,"" they said. Meanwhile, a 4-member team of experts supervised by renowned clinical virologist Prof Jacob John is visiting affected areas in Malkangiri to ascertain the causes of encephalitis outbreak.[byline: Hemant Kumar Rout]--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[At last, AES is being addressed. AES has been mentioned occasionally in previous reports during this outbreak, but most attribute the deaths to JE. As mentioned in previous comments, the encephalitis picture in this region of India is complicated. The JE virus etiology of some previously reported encephalitis cases has been confirmed by laboratory tests. However, many cases go undiagnosed, or JE virus infection is ruled out, and other etiologies, including Reye syndrome-like disease and lychee consumption, have been proposed.In a previous comment (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20151117.3798363), Dr Jacob John has again called for an integrated approach for surveillance with adequate laboratory support and dissemination of information that emerges to clinicians and to public health authorities as guidance for patient treatment and JE vaccination efforts. He also reiterates the need for more specific diagnosis of the etiology or etiologies of AES, since JE virus infections have been excluded in many cases, as noted in his comments and previous ProMED-mail posts. Those previous ProMED-mail posts have implicated Reye syndrome, consumption of lychees, and heat stroke, as well as JE virus infections, as responsible for AES. Dr Jacob John has asserted that many of these are hypoglycemic Reye syndrome cases. He noted that in the pre-monsoon period, particularly in May and June, outbreaks of Reye-like acute hypoglycemic encephalopathy occur in the north western region of Bihar state and that is also popularly, but unfortunately, called AES (acute encephalitis syndrome). Many doctors, the media, and the public consider these encephalopathy cases as encephalitis because of the term AES. This has been now clarified and in June 2014 children were treated by 10 per cent dextrose infusion and many lives were saved (under publication). However, the current outbreak began at the end of the monsoon season and has continued. Other etiologies have been proposed by clinicians. A published article in a pediatric journal proposed that some cases are due to heat stroke. It has been proposed that consumption of lychees is responsible for some encephalitis cases. Encephalopathy and hypoglycemia have been associated with consumption of lychee fruit containing phytotoxins, specifically alpha-(methylenecyclopropyl)glycine (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20150201.3132842). Several reports have associated AES with contaminated water, suggesting enterovirus etiology.The leadership of Dr Jacob John in the group investigating the outbreak is good news. Perhaps they will be able to come up with the etiology or etiologies of these AES cases. Until the etiological agents responsible for the cases are definitively identified, these unfortunate cases will continue and prevention or optimal treatment will not be possible.Maps of India can be accessed at <http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/india-political-map.htm> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/315>. - Mod.TY]
