MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016 [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6544a4.htm?s_cid=mm6544a4_e#suggestedcitation>Lozier M, Adams L, Febo MF, et al. Incidence of Zika virus disease by age and sex -- Puerto Rico, November 1, 2015-October 20, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(44):1219-1223. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6544a4, PMID: 27832051.Zika virus is a flavivirus transmitted primarily by _Aedes_ species mosquitoes; symptoms of infection include rash, arthralgia, fever, and conjunctivitis. Zika virus infection during pregnancy can cause microcephaly and other serious brain anomalies and in rare cases, Zika virus infection has been associated with Guillain-BarrÌ© syndrome and severe thrombocytopenia. This report describes the incidence of reported symptomatic Zika virus disease in the US territory of Puerto Rico by age and sex. During 1 Nov to 20 Oct 2016, 62 500 suspected Zika virus disease cases were reported to the Puerto Rico Department of Health (PRDH); 29 345 (47 per cent) were confirmed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing, or were presumptively diagnosed based on serological testing. The highest incidence among confirmed or presumptive cases occurred among persons aged 20-29 years (1150 cases per 100 000 residents). Among 28 219 (96.2 per cent) nonpregnant patients with confirmed or presumptive Zika virus disease, incidence was higher among women (936 per 100 000 population) than men (576 per 100 000) for all age groups more or equal 20 years, and the majority (61 per cent) of reported Zika virus disease cases occurred in females. Among suspected Zika virus disease cases in nonpregnant adults aged more or equal 40 years, the percentage that tested positive among females (52 per cent) was higher than that among males (47 per cent) (p less than 0.01). Reasons for the higher incidence of Zika virus disease among women aged more or equal 20 years are not known; serosurveys of persons living near confirmed Zika virus disease cases might help to elucidate these findings. Residents of and travelers to Puerto Rico should remove or cover standing water, practice mosquito abatement, employ mosquito bite avoidance behaviors, take precautions to reduce the risk for sexual transmission, and seek medical care for any acute illness with rash or fever.--communicated by:Roland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgiumroland.hubner@sante.belgique.be[Puerto Rico is a focal area of intense Zika virus transmission, with no end in sight. Both visitors and residents should heed the advice of health authorities for mosquito bite avoidance behaviors, precautions to reduce the risk for sexual transmission, and seeking medical care for any acute illness with rash or fever. - Mod.TY]******[3] Synthetic DNA vaccineDate: Thu 10 Nov 2016Source: Science Daily [edited]<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/11/161110125203.htm>As the global spread of the Zika virus continues, efforts are under way to halt the disease's transmission. While no licensed therapies or vaccines to protect against the Zika virus are currently available, new research published in the journal npj Vaccines demonstrates how a synthetic DNA vaccine approach successfully protected against infection, brain damage and death caused by the mosquitoborne Zika virus in vivo.In this preclinical study, 100 per cent of the animal models were protected from Zika after vaccination followed by a challenge with the Zika virus. In addition, they were protected from degeneration in the cerebral cortex and hippocampal areas of the brain, while the other cohort showed degeneration of the brain after Zika infection.""Our results support the critical importance of immune responses for both preventing infection as well as ameliorating disease caused by the Zika virus,"" said lead researcher David B Weiner PhD, executive vice president and director of the Vaccine Center at The Wistar Institute and the WW Smith Charitable Trust professor in cancer research at Wistar. ""As the threat of Zika continues, these results provide insight into a new aspect of the possibly protective ability of such a vaccine as a preventative approach for Zika infection.""This study is the 1st of its kind to analyze a vaccine in an animal model that is susceptible to the disease, providing information regarding the protective impact of the immune response in susceptible individuals. Prior studies of the Zika virus have tested vaccines in animal models that are naturally resistant to Zika. This study extends these prior research studies in an important manner.J Joseph Kim PhD, MBA, president and CEO of Inovio Pharmaceuticals Inc, added, ""Working with Wistar, we have clearly demonstrated the power and the speed of our product development platform when we and our collaborators moved our Zika vaccine from the bench to human studies in less than 6 months, taking advantage of our platform to help in this outbreak situation.""In this latest study, Weiner and colleagues demonstrated how a synthetic DNA vaccine expressed specific antigens for Zika in vivo. They observed that this novel vaccine generated robust antigen-specific antibody and T cell responses that neutralized the virus in preclinical animal models. Moreover, they found that the vaccine provided protection against the disease and death in animal models while also being neuroprotective, meaning that the disease was unable to spread to the brain. This is especially important given the risk that infants born with the disease have of developing microcephaly, a birth defect resulting in an abnormally small head and that may prevent the brain from developing properly.One important aspect of Zika and many other mosquitoborne diseases is that not everyone infected with the virus will actually become ill as a result. With Zika, only about 20 to 25 per cent of individuals with the virus are actually impacted by the disease, according to previous studies from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). However, there is no way to know for certain who will be at risk for illness due to the virus, which is why it was crucial for this study to examine how a vaccine would operate in an infected, symptomatic host.This Zika vaccine is being developed in collaboration between Inovio, The Wistar Institute, and GeneOne Life Science Inc and is currently being tested in 2 human clinical studies. Before the end of 2016, Inovio expects to report phase I data from the first 40-subject study being conducted in Miami, Philadelphia and Quebec City. In August, the companies also initiated a 2nd study in 160 subjects in Puerto Rico. CDC estimates that Zika will infect more than 25 percent of the Puerto Rican population by the end of the year, creating the potential for this study's placebo-controlled design to provide exploratory signals of vaccine efficacy in 2017.A total of nearly 4000 cases of Zika infection have been reported in the United States alone, according to CDC. While most of these are travel-associated cases, more than 100 cases of Zika infection originating within the United States have been reported. Globally, more than 60 countries have reported mosquitoborne transmission of the disease.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[These results are very encouraging. Because 80 per cent of individuals who contract Zika virus infections do not develop clinical signs, if these asymptomatic individuals have viremias of sufficiently high magnitude to provide infectious blood meals for vector mosquitoes, or can transmit the virus sexually, it appears that the vast majority, perhaps 80 per cent, of the population at risk would have to be vaccinated in order to halt transmission. It will be interesting to know if pregnant women, especially those in the 1st trimester, can tolerate the vaccine to prevent infection of their fetuses. - Mod.TY]******[4] Zika virus origin in Americas, commentDate: Thu 10 Nov 2016From: Stephen Seligman <sseligman@mail.rockefeller.edu> [edited]Phylogenetic analysis of Zika isolates clearly indicates that the origin of the strains circulating in Latin America was in French Polynesia (Pettersson JH, Eldholm V, Seligman SJ, et al. How did Zika virus emerge in the Pacific Islands and Latin America? MBio. 2016;7(5). pii: e01239-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01239-16.). There appear to be 2 independent sources for the strains circulating in the Pacific Islands (Oceania). One caused an epidemic in Yap Island, Micronesia (2007) and a 2nd was responsible for the epidemic in French Polynesia (2013-14).--communicated by:Stephen J Seligman, MDResearch ProfessorNew York Medical CollegeValhalla, NYAdjunct ProfessorThe Rockefeller UniversityNew York, NY<sseligman@rockefeller.edu>[ProMED-mail thanks Dr Seligman for his comments, clarifying the origin of Zika virus in the Americas. The way in which the virus was brought from Oceania to the Americas has not been established, but speculation that a viremic person who attended international sporting events in Brazil brought the virus seems likely. - Mod.TY]
