Denver Post, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/11/13/new-york-water-tainted-firefighting-foam-military-base/?preview_id=22204197>In this chronically struggling city along the Hudson River [Newburgh, New York state], residents beset by poverty, high crime and boarded-up homes now have an entirely new worry -- that their tap water may have exposed them to a chemical linked to cancer.State officials recently launched an ambitious effort to offer blood tests to Newburgh's 28 000 residents after the chemical PFOS -- used for years in firefighting foam at the nearby military air base -- was found in the city's drinking water reservoir at levels exceeding federal guidelines.""The fact that I've been drinking that water for years, and my daughter's been drinking and bathing in it, that's shocking to me,"" says [SS], an artist who moved here from Brooklyn 14 years ago. ""My daughter is 11. What diseases is she going to have to look forward to? It's scary.""PFOS, or perfluorooctane sulfonate, has been linked to cancer, thyroid problems, and other serious health issues. Results of the blood testing, expected to be released early next year [2017], won't tell people whether they're actually at increased risk for any specific health problem, but will show how their exposure compares to others.Similar testing has been done in several smaller communities with water contaminated with PFOS or its close chemical cousin, PFOA, which is used in nonstick and stain-repellent coatings.About 1500 people were tested near an air base in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and found to have slightly elevated levels of the chemicals. In the rural villages of Hoosick Falls and Petersburgh, New York, where plastics plants are being held liable for PFOA in public and private wells, tests of about 3000 residents that began in February [2016] have found PFOA blood levels as high as 500 times the national average.For Newburgh, about an hour's drive north of New York City, a potential health crisis was the last thing it needed. The city, which served as George Washington's Revolutionary War headquarters, was humming with machine shops, clothing factories, shipyards, and brickyards in the early 20th century.But in the 1960s, a slow decline began after a new bridge over the Hudson River diverted traffic away from the city's commercial center. Factories started shutting down or moving to the new highway corridor outside the city. Now the city is notorious for derelict abandoned buildings, drug gangs, and violent crime.In 2014, PFOS was detected in 175-acre [71 ha] Lake Washington, the city's drinking water supply, at a level 170 parts per trillion, well below the 400 ppt limit then recommended by the US Environmental Protection Agency. When the EPA set a new level of 70 ppt for short-term exposure in May 2016, the city declared an emergency and shifted to a new water source.New York's Department of Environmental Conservation has identified nearby Stewart Air National Guard Base as the source of the PFOS, suspecting the chemical, used for years in firefighting emergencies and drills, got into a stream leading to the city reservoir.Free blood tests are being offered through 19 Nov 2016 to any resident who makes an appointment at one of 7 clinics. But getting people tested in Newburgh presents special challenges. More than 1/3 of residents live in poverty and more than 46 percent of households speak a language other than English at home.""Newburgh is a very poor city, and special recognition has to be given to the fact that people who are really struggling, really at the edge, are going to need extra help getting out, learning about it,"" says [SS], whose sculpture studio is in one of Newburgh's most run-down and crime-ridden neighborhoods. ""On my street, people have vaguely heard there was an issue with the water.""Newburgh resident [DB], who works as a medical case manager, says she knocked on doors in her own 4-story apartment building and found nobody had heard about the blood-testing program, despite several public meetings and media reports. She says information should be sent home with schoolchildren and posted at street corners, on buses and in shopping centers.""We need to get this information out at all levels to everyone,"" she says. ""I personally sent out a mass phone text to everyone in my address book encouraging them to call the number to schedule an appointment.""Dr Nathan Graber, director of the state health agency's Center for Environmental Health, says his department is translating materials into Spanish and Creole and engaging with the city's religious leaders, school superintendent and community groups to improve outreach.Even though officials have stressed blood tests won't diagnose specific illnesses, some residents hope they will shed some light on nagging health worries.One resident says her 18-year-old son's sudden death in 2010 was attributed to natural causes, but now she wonders if PFOS had anything to do with it.""I'm always thinking about this, trying to find answers about what happened to my baby,"" she says. ""We were always very health-conscious and drank lots and lots of water, because water is life, right? Now I wonder about that.""--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Perfluoroalkyls are stable, synthetic chemicals. Perfluoroalkyls are unique because they repel oil, grease, and water. The 2 perfluoroalkyls acids (PFAA) made in the largest amounts in the US are perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS). Perfluoroalkyls have been used in surface protection products such as carpet and clothing treatments and coating for paper and cardboard packaging. They have also been used in fire-fighting foams.Tissue specific uptake and elimination of perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) were studied in rainbow trout (_Oncorhynchus mykiss_) exposed (orally and in the water) to PFAAs for 28 days. They were then allowed 28 days without PFAAs. The longest estimated elimination half-lives were found to be for PFOS between 8.4 days in muscle tissue and 20.4 days in the liver.In a human study in a region in China having the same problem, it was learned that urine is a significant means of elimination; males eliminate significantly more than females and young adults significantly more than the elderly. Prenatal exposure was associated with lower birth weights. Trans-placental passage and breastfeeding are both significant routes of human exposure to PFAAs.The thymus was identified as a novel site for localization for PFOS and bone (bone marrow), skin, and muscle as significant body compartments for PFOS. These findings demonstrate that PFOS leaves the bloodstream and enters most tissues in a dose-dependent manner.Animal studies show that PFOS is well absorbed orally and distributes mainly in the serum and the liver. No further metabolism is expected. Elimination from the body is slow and occurs via the urine and feces.PFOS, an emerging persistent contaminant that is commonly encountered during daily life, has been shown to exert toxic effects on the central nervous system (CNS). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the neurotoxicity of PFOS remain largely unknown. It has been widely acknowledged that the inflammatory mediators released by hyper-activated microglia play vital roles in the pathogenesis of various neurological diseases.Curcumin is a natural polyphenolic compound abundant in the rhizome of the perennial herb turmeric. It is commonly used as a dietary spice and coloring agent in cooking and anecdotally as an herb in traditional Asian medicine. In this particular study, male rats were treated with 3 different PFOS doses (0.6, 1.25, and 2.5 mg/kg) and one dose of curcumin, from _Curcuma longa_ (80 mg/kg), and combined 3 doses of PFOS with 80 mg/kg dose of curcumin by gavage for 30 days at 48 hour intervals. Here, we investigated the DNA damage via single-cell gel electrophoresis/comet assay and micronucleus test in rat peripheral blood in vivo. It is found that all doses of PFOS increased micronucleus frequency (p less than 0.05) and strongly induced DNA damage in peripheral blood in 2 different parameters; the damaged cell percent and genetically damage index, and curcumin prevented the formation of DNA damage induced by PFOS. Results showed that curcumin inhibited DNA damage including GDI at certain levels at statistical manner, 30.07 percent, 54.41 percent, and 36.99 percent for 0.6 mg/kg, 1.25 mg/kg, and 2.5 mg/kg.Health effects of perfluoroalkyl-compounds on humans remain controversial, in spite of a number of experimental and epidemiological studies. In one study, subjects with polycystic ovary syndrome had higher serum concentrations of PFOS. Some studies of women and infants found that PFOS levels negatively correlated with birth weight only in female infants, while other studies found the association to be small. Pre-natal exposure may be associated with immunosuppression in early childhood. Testosterone production may be compromised in individuals with high PFOS exposure. An occupational study conducted on volunteers working at 2 different 3M plants showed a relationship between higher PFOS serum levels and higher mean values for triglycerides, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, ALT [alanine transaminase], and serum triiodothyronine, as well as a lower thyroid hormone binding ratio. In a mortality study, which followed workers for 37 years, a statistically significant risk of death from bladder cancer was reported. In a different study, PFOS altered the expression of crucial genes, reduced ATP [adenosine triphosphate] production, induced ROS [reactive oxygen species], and stimulated apoptosis [programmed cell death] during the early stages of cardiogenesis. It appears that that PFOS induces apoptosis in A549 cells through a reactive oxygen species-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction pathway mechanism. PFOS suppressed IL-2 production in both a human cell line and human primary cells at dose levels within the high end of the human exposure range. In a study on serum levels of men and women, higher concentrations of PFOS were observed in men in comparison to women from the same populations.Animal studies--------------PFOS was found to be mildly irritating to the eyes and nonirritating to the skin of rabbits. Adverse signs of toxicity observed in rat studies included increases in liver enzymes, hepatic vacuolization, and hepatocellular hypertrophy, gastrointestinal effects, hematological abnormalities, weight loss, convulsions, and death. These effects were reported at doses of 2 mg/kg/day and above. PFOS has shown moderate acute toxicity by the oral route in rats. Mice pups were administered PFOS by one subcutaneous injection. PFOS induced degression of the body weights of mice and increase of relative weights of liver. Results indicated that younger mice pups were more sensitive to PFOS exposure. Dietary treatment of male mice with 0.005 percent (w/w) PFOS for 10 days resulted in significant reductions in serum levels of cholesterol and triglycerides, a moderate increase in the serum activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and hepatomegaly, without affecting other immune organs. In rabbits, significant reductions in fetal body weight, and significant increases in delayed ossification were observed in the offspring of pregnant females administered PFOS during gestation. PFOS was negative in mutagenicity studies in 5 strains of _Salmonella_ and did not induce micronuclei in an in vivo mouse bone marrow micronucleus assay. PFOS was carcinogenic in the rat, inducing tumors of the liver and the thyroid gland in the males and tumors of the liver and of the thyroid and mammary gland in females.Over all it appears there is reason for concern as the chemical can accumulate in the liver, skin, kidney, and neurological and endocrine systems of the body.So the city is at least gathering a point-in-time level that may serve as a guide in the coming months.Portions of this comment were extracted from <https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Perfluorooctanesulfonic_acid#section=Body-Burdens>, where more information on these chemicals and the effect on the body, elimination, and animals studies may be found. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/47553>.]
