Gov.uk Veterinary Medicines Directorate report [edited]<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/armitage-pet-care-flea-and-tick-drops-for-dogs-and-armitage-flea-drops-for-cats-and-kittens-product-defect-alert>We wish to make wholesalers, veterinary surgeons, retailers, and pet owners aware that the Veterinary Medicines Directorate [VMD] has been notified that Bio-Tech Solutions Ltd has issued a recall of:- Armitage Pet Care Flea and Tick Drops for Dogs 702 mg spot-on solution (Vm 20205/4003)- Armitage Flea Drops for Cats and Kittens.An unknown quantity of the Armitage Pet Care Flea and Tick Drops for Dogs containing permethrin has been distributed in packaging labelled Armitage Flea Drops for Cats and Kittens.Exposure to even small quantities of concentrated permethrin can cause severe and fatal poisoning in cats.If you have one of the products, do not use it on your cat.Return the product to the place of purchase or contact the company: John Tharratt, Bio-Tech solutions Tel 08704 450154 or email <JTharratt@btsl.uk.com>.--Communicated by:Sabine ZentisCastleview English LonghornsGut LaachD-52385 NideggenGermany<cvlonghorns@aol.com>[Information for vets addressing permethrin toxicity in cats is available at <http://icatcare.org/permethrin/vet-info>. - Mod.AS][Pyrethrins and pyrethroids are insecticides that are sold for the treatment of flea and tick infestation. Pyrethrins are natural substances extracted from _Chrysanthemum_ species; the term pyrethroid describes similar, synthetically manufactured molecules produced with the aim of increasing the photostability of this group of drugs. Although it might be expected that pyrethrins would be relatively safe to use for ectoparasite control, given the differences between mammals and insects, cats are frequently presented as an emergency to the veterinary practitioner showing clinical signs after pyrethrin exposure.The toxic dose for pyrethrin and pyrethroids is currently unknown, but based on cases reported to the Animal Poison Control Center (APCC) in the USA, 1 ml of 45 percent permethrin applied dermally to a 4.5 kg cat can result in life-threatening toxicosis. In the UK, spot-on preparations for dogs can contain up to 74.4 percent permethrin.Permethrin and other pyrethroids act as neurotoxins; they exert their effect by binding to and blocking sodium channels on the surface of nerve cells, which interferes with nerve function. Because insects are much more susceptible to the effects of pyrethroids than mammals, these chemicals are widely used as insecticides, and are sometimes used for control of fleas and ticks on animals. While permethrin has a wide safety margin for most mammals, meaning it is generally very safe to use, cats are highly sensitive to permethrin and are much more likely to develop signs of toxicity than dogs.Permethrin is fat-soluble and can be absorbed into the body across the skin, or after being swallowed. It is metabolised (broken down by) the liver, and it is thought that cats have different liver metabolic pathways to other species (in particular a relative deficiency of the enzyme hepatic glucuronosyltransferase) leading to a poor ability to break down permethrin. This makes cats much more susceptible to being poisoned.There are a number of reasons why cats may be particularly susceptible to intoxication with pyrethrins and pyrethroids. Their relatively high surface area to weight ratio means that, with topical application, smaller individuals tend to receive higher doses on a mg/kg basis. Furthermore, pyrethroids are excreted following either oxidation or glucuronidation, and the reduced capacity for glucuronidation in the cat can contribute to the accumulation of metabolites and a less efficient detoxification process. Finally, other substances added to the formulation might utilise the capacity of detoxification enzymes, further prolonging exposure.Exposure to even small quantities of concentrated permethrin can cause severe and fatal poisoning in cats. After exposure to permethrin, signs of toxicity usually develop within a few hours, but in some cases can take one to 3 days to become apparent. Common clinical signs of toxicity include: Muscle tremors; Twitching seizures (as shown in the accompanying video clip); Salivation; Incoordination; Fever; Dilated pupils. Unfortunately, many cases of permethrin toxicity result in death of the cat, and from recorded cases, anywhere between 10 and 40 percent of poisoned cats may die or need to be euthanized because of the severity of the poisoning. Rapid and prompt treatment may save the cat's life. With prompt treatment, 60-90 percent of cats can survive. The 2 large determining factors are dose and rapid emergency treatment.Cats are usually poisoned by permethrin following exposure to the concentrated permethrin spot-on products designed to control fleas and ticks on dogs. Many different flea spot-on products and shampoos/rinses that are manufactured for use on dogs contain permethrin. These products are safe to use on dogs but not on cats. Unfortunately, concentrated permethrin-based flea spot-on products are often inexpensive and widely available. Problems usually occur when owners buy products from shops where nobody is available to explain their safe use. Although the outer packaging of these products often contains warnings not to use them on cats, these may be missed. Often, owners do not realise that the products can cause fatal toxicity to cats. A dog product may be accidentally used on a cat, or sometimes owners mistakenly think that a product so widely available would not cause severe problems and may treat a cat with a small amount of the dog product, often with fatal results. Another important way cats can become poisoned is when a dog in a house is treated with a permethrin-based spot-on and a cat then sleeps next to the dog, cuddles up to the dog, or grooms the dog. This can lead to enough permethrin being absorbed by the cat to cause severe poisoning.It is recommended that cats be kept away from dogs for at least 72 hours after a concentrated permethrin spot-on has been used on a dog. Although many products contain permethrin (including some fly sprays, ant powders etc.), it is usually only the flea spot-on preparations that contain high concentrations of permethrin and, therefore, are likely to cause significant toxicity to cats.The safest place to get advice on products and to insure you are purchasing the correct product is your veterinarian. If you suspect your cat may have been poisoned, it is critical that you contact your vet as quickly as possible and get urgent treatment. Treatment of permethrin poisoning is largely supportive, as there is no antidote for the poison, but early treatment is important to avoid suffering. In general terms, treatment involves:Decontamination - Because most cats are exposed after having permethrin products applied to their skin, decontamination involves thorough washing of the cat with lukewarm water and a mild detergent. The aim is to remove as much of the product as possible to stop further absorption through the skin.Seizure/tremor control - Treatment of muscle tremors may involve the use of methocarbamol (a muscle relaxant) or benzodiazepines (diazepam or midazolam), although the latter may not be very effective. Treatment of seizures may involve the use of drugs such as barbiturates (phenobarbitone), and sometimes even general anaesthesia or heavy sedation are required (propofol or alfaxalone).General supportive care - Supportive care involves intravenous fluids, temperature monitoring and other nursing care. Cats may require several days of treatment in the veterinary clinic before slowly recovering.Lipid infusions - Recently, some cats with permethrin poisoning have been treated with special intravenous lipid infusions. These appear to be helpful in some severe cases of poisoning (the lipid may help to remove the permethrin from tissues and reduce its toxicity).This is a hugely important recall and may well affect more than just the EU. This product is also sold on sites such as Amazon.com. The immediate announcement is appreciated prior to animals dying. The rapid notification may prevent deaths.We hope word of this recall will spread quickly and prevent pet deaths.Portions of this comment were extracted from: <http://icatcare.org/permethrin/owner-info>: - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/40>.].................................................arn/ao/dk/tg/msp/dk"
