CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016; 65(45); 1274-5 [summ., edited]<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6545a6.htm?s_cid=mm6545a6_w>Vasquez AM, Lake J, Ngai S, et al. Fungal Bloodstream Infections Associated with a Compounded Intravenous Medication at an Outpatient Oncology Clinic -- NYC, 2016------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------On 24 May 2016, the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene notified CDC of 2 cases of _Exophiala dermatitidis_ bloodstream infections among patients with malignancies who had received care from a single physician at an outpatient oncology facility (clinic A). Review of 1 Jan 2016 - 31 May 2016 microbiology records identified _E. dermatitidis_ bloodstream infections in 2 additional patients who also had received care at clinic A. All 4 patients had implanted vascular access ports and had received intravenous (IV) medications, including a compounded IV flush solution containing saline, heparin, vancomycin, and ceftazidime, compounded and administered at clinic A._E. dermatitidis_ (previously known as _Wangiella dermatitidis_) is a neurotropic, dark pigment-forming fungus that is found in the environment (1). Health care-associated infections have been reported and include catheter-associated fungemia (1) and an outbreak of _E. dermatitidis_ meningitis associated with contaminated injectable steroids prepared by a compounding pharmacy (2).A case was defined as any non-Candida species yeast or mold identified on culture of blood or central venous catheter (CVC) (implanted port or peripherally inserted central catheter) from a patient who received care at clinic A during 1 Jan 2016 - 31 May 2016. Case finding included microbiology record review, medical record review, and requests for screening blood and CVC cultures for all patients who had received an IV medication at clinic A during this period.During that period, a total of 153 patients were seen at clinic A, 38 (25 percent) of whom received an IV medication. Among these 38 patients, 6 were deceased before the investigation began with case status undetermined, and 3 declined to be evaluated, leaving 29 patients for analysis. A total of 17 (59 percent) of the 29 patients met the case definition, including 13 whose cultures yielded _E. dermatitidis_, 2 with _Rhodotorula mucilaginosa_, and 2 with both fungi. No cases were identified among patients who did not receive IV medications. As many as 5 of the 17 cases were identified in symptomatic patients who sought medical care for infection or underlying medical conditions, and the remaining 12 were identified by screening blood or CVC culture. Up to 2 of the infected patients died at 10 days and 12 weeks after positive culture, respectively; it was unclear whether the deaths were related to the infections.The 17 patients with a positive culture (by blood or CVC culture) did not share a common chemotherapeutic exposure or a common adjunctive IV therapy (e.g., dexamethasone or ondansetron). However, all patients with or without a positive culture were exposed to the compounded IV flush solution. Patients with a positive culture received a median of 12 flushes (range = 2-20) during the study period compared with a median of four flushes for those with a negative culture (range = 1-12) (p = 0.004, Kruskal-Wallis test).A total of 24 of the 29 patients had a CVC, and 5 received IV medications through a peripheral line; all 17 patients with a positive culture had a CVC (attack rate of 71 percent compared with 0 percent among those with a peripheral line). After the screening blood culture was obtained, all patients with a CVC had their venous access removed and began 4-6 weeks of antifungal therapy. The 5 patients who received IV medications through a peripheral line had negative screening blood cultures, and antifungal treatment was not recommended.Assessment of clinic A revealed failures to meet CDC infection control standards for outpatient oncology settings (3) as well as standards for sterile medication compounding and handling of hazardous drugs as outlined by U.S. Pharmacopeia chapters 797 and 800 (4,5) and the FDA (6). Investigators learned that IV flush bags containing saline, heparin, vancomycin, and ceftazidime had been compounded under substandard conditions, stored in a refrigerator, and accessed daily for multiple patients over approximately 4-8 weeks until the solution was depleted.Upon issuance of an order by the commissioner of the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene on 31 May 2016, the provider ceased treating patients at clinic A until it became compliant with medication preparation and infection prevention standards. This outbreak highlights the gaps in both awareness and enforcement of national and state pharmacy and infection control standards in outpatient settings that perform parenteral medication compounding and infusion services (3-6).References------------------1. Nachman S, Alpan O, Malowitz R and Spitzer ED. Catheter-associated fungemia due to Wangiella (Exophiala) dermatitidis. J Clin Microbiol. 1996;34(4):1011-3, PMID: 8815072. Available at <http://jcm.asm.org/content/34/4/1011.long>.2. CDC: Exophiala infection from contaminated injectable steroids prepared by a compounding pharmacy--United States, July-November 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2002;51(49):1109-12, PMID: 12530707. Available at: <http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5149a1.htm>.3. CDC: Basic infection control and prevention plan for outpatient oncology settings. Atlanta GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2011. Available at: <https://www.cdc.gov/hai/pdfs/guidelines/basic-infection-control-prevention-plan-2011.pdf>4. US Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. Chapter 797. Pharmaceutical compounding--sterile preparations. In: United States Pharmacopeia 39--National Formulary 34. Rockville, MD: US Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.; 2016:626-670.5. US Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. Chapter 800. Hazardous drugs--handling in healthcare settings. In: United States Pharmacopeia 39--National Formulary 34, First supplement. Rockville, MD: US Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.; 2016:7721-7739.6. Food and Drug Administration. Pharmacy compounding of human drug products under section 503A of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2016. Available at: <http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM469119.pdf>Authors: Vasquez AM, Lake J, Ngai S, et al. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This ProMED moderator previously chronicled the disastrous outbreak caused by the injection of corticosteroid contamination primarily by _Exserohilum rostratum_ which occurred in a Massachusetts compounding pharmacy. This mold, a plant pathogen, has rarely been associated with human infection and might be considered as non-virulent. Virulence, however, is not really a property of an organism per se but rather a combination of factors occurring at the pathogen/potential host interface. Clearly, by introducing this organism into the body with corticosteroids (which can affect the local immune response), it can produce quite serious and potentially lethal infections, as occurred in this large outbreak.It is surprising, with as many positive blood or catheter cultures that occurred, that the cluster was not recognized sooner. It is vitally important that compounding pharmacies practice extreme infection control to prevent such potentially lethal complications. It is not clear how often the compounding pharmacy was inspected in regard to its infection control practices. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/252>.]
