FOX25 WFXT [edited]<http://www.fox25boston.com/news/heroin-crisis-causing-hepatitis-c-cases-to-skyrocket/467545089>New data obtained by FOX25 revealed the heroin epidemic is leading to a new public health problem in Massachusetts. The number of hepatitis C cases is skyrocketing and it is having a big impact on recovering addicts, their families, and the state.A recovering heroin addict, now battling hepatitis C, said that his new battle is a life changing consequence of the state's heroin crisis. ""Just because you get clean doesn't mean everything goes back to the way it is. It's not all rainbows and puppy dogs,"" he told FOX25. This story of addiction is a familiar one. The father of 2 grew up in an upper middle class home in Newton and became hooked first on painkillers prescribed after he was injured while serving in the Army. The addiction to pain killers led to heroin.2 years ago, he got high with a woman who was upfront with him that she had hepatitis C. He used her needle anyway and did not care about the consequences. ""I didn't care. The heroin was more important to me at that time than anything,"" he said.When drug addicts share needles they are also sharing bodily fluids, which is how hepatitis C is transmitted. It attacks the liver and can cause liver failure or liver cancer. Dr Ray Chung, Director of Hepatology at Massachusetts General Hospital, said hepatitis C can lead to even more deadly diagnoses. ""In fact liver cancer -- particularly related to hepatitis C -- but liver cancer as a whole, is the fastest rising cause of cancer death in this country,"" he said. Chung and Massachusetts Public Health officials believe there is a direct correlation between the rise in heroin use and the rise in hepatitis C among young people.FOX25 found hepatitis C rates have been steadily increasing in Massachusetts over the past decade. More than 9000 confirmed and probable cases in 2015, compared to more than 7000 in 2005. In 2015 close to 5000 of the cases were 15- to 39-year-olds. The Department of Public Health told FOX25 they are working to stop the spread of hepatitis C. They said they perform about 30 000 tests a year to screen for. They also have 6 funded state programs that include need exchange services, education and outreach.[Byline: Heather Hegedus, Jesse Grossi]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Massachusetts can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/224>.]******[2] KentuckyDate: Mon 14 Nov 2016Source: Stat News [edited]<https://www.statnews.com/2016/11/14/hepatitis-c-cure-kentucky/>The patients [in Hazard, Kentucky] ask about the treatment [for hepatitis C] by name. They have seen the crisp, alluring ads on TV and heard the soothing spots on the radio: Harvoni, they know, could cure their hepatitis C. But in this town, carved into the Appalachian Mountains, in a state beset by hepatitis C rates 7 times the national average, Harvoni and other new hepatitis C drugs remain largely out of reach. Over the past year, only 3 percent of the state's Medicaid beneficiaries with the disease received treatment.""It's very hard to see the patient and just tell them, I can't treat you,"" said Dr Fares Khater, an infectious disease doctor in nearby Whitesburg. A major reason is cost, with list prices for some 12-week treatment courses approaching $100 000. But a series of other forces helps explain why Kentucky is struggling to respond to the hepatitis C crisis, including a growing opioid epidemic that is fueling new cases and a changing patient base that is demanding hard choices be made about who gets treatment first.With opioid use seeding the spread of infectious disease across the country, this state could be a case study in how hepatitis C affects other areas, and what happens when demands for specialists, surveillance, and treatment outstrip the ability of health systems to respond. ""We do not have the capability to deal with this because we do not have the resources,"" said Doug Thoroughman, Kentucky's acting state epidemiologist.Hepatitis C is a viral disease that attacks the liver and, when the condition becomes chronic, causes liver cancer and scarring called fibrosis or, when it is severe, cirrhosis. The disease is the leading cause of liver transplants in the country, and an estimated 19 000 people die from hepatitis C-related complications each year. Most people with the disease experience symptoms only when their livers suffer damage, which can take years after they contract the virus. That leaves many of the 2.7 million to 3.9 million Americans with hepatitis C carrying it unknowingly. 3 years ago, the 1st of the innovative hepatitis C drugs marched onto the market, signaling a new era for patients who could be cured in a shorter time and with fewer side effects. But the reality is that many of the people who need the drugs are uninsured or depend on Medicaid, and many state Medicaid programs can't afford the medications for their thousands of infected beneficiaries.In fiscal 2016, hepatitis C treatments -- given to fewer than 900 of the 29 000 hepatitis C patients covered by Kentucky's Medicaid program -- ate up 5 percent of the program's pharmacy budget. Access to the drugs could grow more limited. Kentucky has so many beneficiaries with hepatitis C because it expanded Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act to more than 425 000 additional residents. But those residents stand to lose their coverage if President-elect Donald Trump and congressional Republicans repeal President Obama's health law without offering a replacement. Even if the Medicaid expansion remains in place, state proposals could impose new restrictions. Republican Governor Matt Bevin has asked the federal government to allow Kentucky to make many beneficiaries pay premiums, framing it as a way to sustain the expensive expansion.Advocates for underserved populations are raising alarms, arguing even small fees would be too expensive for many to keep their insurance. ""Our population here are people that dig change to buy a gallon of gas, maybe to get to work, maybe to get to a doctor's appointment,"" said Mary Meade-McKenzie, the executive director of Kentucky River Community Care, a mental health and substance abuse organization based in Hazard. ""For people who already have nothing, USD 2 is a huge deal. It may mean the difference between buying dinner, whether that is a loaf of bread or bologna or whatever.""With the opioid epidemic steamrolling through Appalachia and New England, the new face of the disease is increasingly young, white, and rural. From 2006 to 2012, hepatitis C infections rose 364 percent among young adults in Kentucky, Tennessee, West Virginia, and Virginia, with rates in rural areas twice as high as those in urban areas, according to the CDC. Because state Medicaid programs are unable to cover all beneficiaries with hepatitis C, they have had to make choices. To qualify for treatment, some beneficiaries in Kentucky, for example, must have stage 3 or 4 liver fibrosis (on a 4-stage scale) and show they have not used alcohol or drugs for 6 months, in part to reduce the chances that someone treated gets reinfected. Liver specialists and infectious disease experts have endorsed treating the sickest patients first, although they recommend that everyone who isn't going to die of another cause within a year should be treated.""You need everybody to be cured,"" said Dr Uday Shankar, a Hazard gastroenterologist who estimated that only 10 percent to 20 percent of his patients have been approved for treatment. ""If you do not cure them today, 1 person will transmit to 5 people. Especially youngsters -- they have a long way to go."" Shankar said he spends chunks of his days helping patients appeal denials for insurance coverage, scanning clinical trial listings, and asking companies what they offer patients who can't afford their medications. He and Khater are the only specialists who treat hepatitis C for at least 7 counties.Health officials here [in Hazard] say they were woken up to the area's vulnerability by something that happened more than 200 miles [322 km] away: an HIV outbreak in Austin, Indiana. Not only did the outbreak show that diseases could vault through close networks of drug users in small towns, but by coincidence, the towns are closely linked. Decades ago, a crowd of people from Hazard moved to Austin for work but kept family ties in Kentucky. The fear was that someone from Austin infected with HIV would come to Hazard and pass the virus to someone here, igniting another viral conflagration in this tight-knit community of 5000 people. High hepatitis C rates can also portend an HIV outbreak, but eastern Kentucky has so far been spared from that. ""There was a direct connection,"" said Sharon Dunaway, the nursing administrator for the Kentucky River District Health Department, which provides health services in 7 counties in this area. Since then, the department has joined with clinicians, mental health providers, and law enforcement to raise awareness about the diseases in the community. Officials have ramped up testing for both HIV and hepatitis C, including at drug courts. They have considered testing at county jails in the area, but there is concern that the counties would then be responsible for covering their inmates' treatments. Now officials are thinking of doing the tests as people are released. They are also working to establish the region's first needle exchange, possibly a mobile one so people do not have to travel far to reach it. Going from one end of a county to the other here can take some time, the roads weaving around the mountains and many people living in hollows, small pockets tucked into the hillsides.But new headwinds are complicating efforts to control the spread of the disease. The decline of the coal industry, which residents say accelerated in the past 2 years, has hit the tax base and sent many people seeking work elsewhere. Some health workers said they feared that the only young adults who would stick around would be people who abuse drugs. Then there are the drugs that are driving the spread of disease. People here have primarily been injecting painkillers or, in some cases, non-opioids. But heroin, which emerged in Louisville, Lexington, and northern Kentucky 4 or 5 years ago, has started popping up recently in rural eastern Kentucky, posing new health problems.The concentration of hepatitis C cases among young adults poses another problem: in roughly 6 percent of pregnancies, the virus is passed from mother to child. This summer [2016], state and federal health officials reported that the infection rate in Kentucky women of childbearing age increased more than 200 percent from 2011 to 2014 and that the proportion of infants born to infected mothers rose 124 percent. ""We have seen an outrageous number of babies who are exposed,"" said Dr Claudia Espinosa, a pediatric infectious disease expert at the University of Louisville. She said she and colleagues track about 100 babies a year with potential exposure compared to a few dozen in prior years. At the University of Kentucky, doctors saw 13 babies born to mothers with hepatitis C in 2010, said Dr Sean McTigue, a pediatric infectious disease expert. In 2015, it was 65 babies, and through August 2016, they had already seen 61 babies. ""It doesn't really seem to be leveling off,"" McTigue said.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Kentucky can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/27866>.In the absence of a vaccine, infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LL]
