Health Best Online (Israel) [in Hebrew, trans. Mod.AS, edited]<http://tinyurl.com/jfdkqbj>A 70-year-old woman, resident of Northern Israel, was admitted to the Bnei Zion Medical Center (BZMC, Haifa) following the consumption of unpasteurized camel's milk.The Director of the Clinic for Infectious Diseases and Travel Medicine at BZMC, Dr. Alona Paz, said: ""She came to us with fever and weakness, and after a series of tests, the Brucella bacterium was discovered in her blood. The source of infection is camel's milk, which the patient used to drink during the last 2 months, 2 cups per day. The prolonged exposure to significant quantities of contaminated milk caused a heavy bacterial load.""After several weeks of hospitalization, treatment, and rehabilitation, the woman was released home in proper condition.Brucellosis (Malta fever) is a disease manifested by fever and can cause damage to various systems such as joints, the heart, and nervous system. According to Dr. Paz, about 10 cases of brucellosis have been registered during the recent months across the country in people hospitalized because of drinking camel's milk [see comment]. ""Dairy products from unknown sources which have not undergone pasteurization, should not be consumed,"" she warned.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[According to earlier reports, the number of patients hospitalized since July 2016 due to infection by _B. melitensis_ in unpasteurized camel milk totaled 12 as of 8 Sep 2016 (see commentary in 20160908.4475736). These included several children from cities in central Israel.The unpasteurized camel milk, advertised as potentially having curative/preventive and other attractive qualities, was distributed by an enterprise in central Israel which derived the milk from camels kept in southern Israel, in proximity to infected sheep and goat flocks. The packing/distributing enterprise was subsequently closed by order of the Ministry of Health while legal steps were undertaken. The lactating, infected camels that were the source of infection are assumed to have been identified and culled; a summarized official report to the effect of such measures being applied, as well as the results of epidemiological investigations of the entire event by the relevant human and animal health authorities, are pending.On top of its impact upon public health (an all-time annual record of human cases registered in 2014), _B melitensis_ is known to have spilled over in Israel from infected sheep and goat flocks into all segments of the animal industry and into human populations (several veterinarians and laboratory personnel included). The evolution of the most recent such event, involving a large commercial dairy cattle operation in Hadarom (South) district, was covered by ProMED-mail between October 2015 and March 2016 (see 5 postings below). Human infections and serious economic losses were recorded.This event, and the brucellosis issue at large, including its planned control, will be subject to several presentations during the 7th and 8th sessions of Israel's 28th annual cattle sciences conference in Jerusalem (22-24 Nov 2016). - Mod.ASA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/90>.]
