Brisbane Times [edited]<http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/act-news/bluegreen-algae-outbreak-prompts-warning-about-yerrabi-pond-water-20161125-gsxh0x.html>Pet owners have been warned to keep their animals away from drinking or swimming in the water at Yerrabi Pond [Australian Capital Territory (ACT)] following a blue-green algal bloom. Blue-green algae can make pets very ill or even result in death.While the Gungahlin waterway is open to rowing, fishing, boating, canoeing and other secondary-contact recreation, Access Canberra has asked the public to take precautions to avoid exposure, particularly to algal scum. People should avoid these activities unless they are experienced and know the risks if contact with algae should occur.The ACT government also recommends being careful not to make primary skin contact with the algae and use shower facilities with suitable water to wash afterward. Exposure to algal scum, in particular, should be avoided, but any clothing that has been in the water should be washed to remove any blue-green algae residue.The area will remain closed to primary contact until further notice but algae levels can change quickly. Water users should look for algae warning signs which indicate the current algae alert level at all public access areas. Anyone concerned about possible symptoms of blue-green algae exposure following water exposure should contact their doctor.[byline: Georgina Connery]--communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) and water quality'Blue-green algae' or cyanobacteria are a type of microscopic, algae-like bacteria that inhabit freshwater, coastal and marine waters.Cyanobacteria photosynthesise like plants and have similar requirements for sunlight, nutrients and carbon dioxide to grow and produce oxygen. There are many different varieties of blue-green algae. While often a green or blue-green colour, they can also be white, brown, blue, yellow-brown or red. The water may appear to have a scum on it or it may appear as a sheen.If conditions are suitable, blue-green algae can increase to excessive levels and form visible 'blooms' which can adversely affect water quality. Poor water quality and the potential for toxicity means that blue-green algae can cause environmental problems, disrupt drinking water supplies, recreational activities and water-dependent industries, and pose a risk to livestock, wildlife and human health.Causes of blue-green algae bloomsBlue-green algae can reproduce quickly in favourable conditions where there is still or slow-flowing water, abundant sunlight and sufficient levels of nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus. In still conditions, surface water may form a separate warm top layer ('stratification') in which blue-green algae is able to access sunlight and nutrients. If these combined factors are present for several days, algae multiply and form large 'blooms'. The process of excess nutrients causing rapid growth of aquatic plant and bacterial life in a water body is known as 'eutrophication'.Nutrients are either naturally present in sediments or are washed into water systems. In particular, phosphorus may be stored in significant amounts in sediments and released by normal bacterial activity. External sources of nitrogen and phosphorus are agricultural fertilisers, household products, sewage effluent and stormwater runoff, all of which can enter receiving waters either directly or during rainfall events. The availability of varying levels of nitrogen and phosphorus can affect which species of blue-green algae dominate and form blooms.Blooms can form in response to increased temperatures and phosphorus levels even if nitrogen in water remains low, as some blue-green algae species can obtain nitrogen from the atmosphere.Effects of a blue-green algae bloomThe main effects of blue-green algae blooms are deterioration of water quality and production of toxins by some species. Exposure to algal toxins has been linked to fatalities of livestock, wildlife and pets.Decaying algae can reduce dissolved oxygen levels in the water column which can severely degrade aquatic ecosystems and lead to the death of aquatic organisms and, hence, a decline in biodiversity.Outbreaks of blue-green algae may have economic consequences from restrictions to the consumptive use of water and recreational activities due to health and aesthetic concerns. Some species of blue-green algae can produce neurotoxins, hepatotoxins, allergens or irritants to the skin and eyes, as well as compounds that affect the taste of water and produce unpleasant odours. In severe cases, the toxins can cause damage to the liver and nervous system and there have been human deaths associated with non-routine exposure to algal toxins through dialysis.When a bloom is detected, alternative sources of water should be sought for human or animal consumption and domestic purposes until specialised treatment processes can be introduced. Boiling water does not destroy algal toxins and can, in fact, releases more toxins as the blue-green algae are killed. Irrigators are usually advised to avoid using contaminated water on edible crops or, if this is not possible, to avoid direct spraying.What are the symptoms of exposure to blue-green algae?Symptoms from drinking water that contain blue-green algae can include: headaches, nausea, fever, sore throat, dizziness, stomach cramps, diarrhea, abdominal pain, vomiting, muscle aches, mouth ulcers, and blistering of the lips. Symptoms from swimming and other recreational water activities in contaminated water can include skin rashes and irritated ears and eyes. Unfortunately swimmers may inadvertently swallow drops of the contaminated water.If you have been exposed to blue-green algae toxins and have any of these symptoms, rinse off your body and see your health care provider right away.How are pets and livestock exposed to blue-green algae?Pets and livestock with no other source of drinking water may be poisoned by drinking contaminated water with blue-green algae. To reduce risk to livestock, do not allow rainwater or other surface runoff to flow through livestock areas. It may be important to provide a drinking tub/trough for your animals other than depending on water that has collected in an earthen tank or pond.How long does a bloom last?Blooms may last for weeks, months, or possibly all year.Management of blue-green algae bloomsAlgal blooms are most effectively managed at the local level because of the varying circumstances in each case. Local councils and state water authorities are best placed to investigate suspected outbreaks and alert the public of any unsafe waters.The most effective method of preventing blue-green algal blooms is to minimise the nutrient load entering waterways through actions such as planting or maintaining riparian vegetation, conserving soil, and implementing appropriate treatment and disposal of stormwater, agricultural, industrial and sewage effluent.Flow manipulation can also be used to prevent the build-up of blue-green algae or to disperse blooms. In reservoirs used for drinking water supplies, various mechanical methods are often used to mix water and prevent conditions of stratification which could bring about blue-green algal blooms. Comprehensive monitoring programs and emergency plans can reduce impacts when blooms do occur.Larger water supply authorities generally conduct regular water sampling which allows the public to be quickly notified of any potentially harmful blooms and to obtain drinking water from alternative sources. Unfortunately, there are currently few ways of dispersing blooms without adverse side-effects, and toxins can remain in the water column even when algae are not visible.Copper-based algicides may be effective in controlling blue-green algae if administered appropriately. Other solutions range from avoiding the extraction of water near blooms, to treating water with chlorine, although residual toxins may need to be removed with a combination of coagulation and filtration.Australian Government action on blue-green algaeThe Australian Government cooperates with state and territory agencies to provide policy guidance on controlling blue-green algal outbreaks.The National Water Quality Management Strategy is endorsed by all states and territories and provides guidance on blue-green algae monitoring actions, alert systems and treatment options, and general drinking water guidelines.The Australian Government indirectly helps control blue-green algae with strategies to minimise nutrients entering waterways, investing in effective stormwater management and delivering water back into the environment.Portions of this comment have been extracted from: <http://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/quality/blue-green-algae>and from: <https://www.healthlinkbc.ca/healthlinkbc-files/blue-green-algae> - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/290>.]
