CDC, Salmonella homepage, 2016 Outbreaks [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/salmonella/heidelberg-11-16/index.html>The United States' Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] is working with Wisconsin health, agriculture, and laboratory agencies, several other states, and the US Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (USDA-APHIS) to investigate a multistate outbreak of multidrug-resistant _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Heidelberg infections.Public health investigators used the PulseNet system to identify illnesses that may have been part of this outbreak. PulseNet, coordinated by CDC, is the national subtyping network of public health and food regulatory agency laboratories. PulseNet performs DNA fingerprinting on salmonella bacteria isolated from ill people by using techniques called pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and whole genome sequencing (WGS). CDC PulseNet manages a national database of these DNA fingerprints to identify possible outbreaks.To date, 21 people infected with an outbreak strain of _S._ Heidelberg have been reported from 8 states. A list of states and the number of cases in each can be found on the case count map page [<https://www.cdc.gov/salmonella/heidelberg-11-16/map.html> and the numbers shown here]:States / Ill people-------------------California / 1Iowa / 1Idaho / 1Minnesota / 2Missouri / 1Oklahoma / 1South Dakota / 2Wisconsin / 12Among 19 people about whom information is available, illnesses started on dates ranging from 11 Jan 2016 to 24 Oct 2016. Ill people range in age from less than 1 year to 72, with a median age of 21. 62 per cent of ill people are female. Among 19 ill people with available information, 8 (42 per cent) reported being hospitalized, and no deaths have been reported.WGS showed that isolates from ill people are closely related genetically to one another. This close genetic relationship means that people in this outbreak are more likely to share a common source of infection. Illnesses that occurred after [24 Oct 2016] might not be reported yet because reporting takes an average of 2 to 4 weeks.Investigation of the outbreak-----------------------------Epidemiologic, traceback, and laboratory findings have identified dairy bull calves from livestock markets in Wisconsin as the likely source of infections. Dairy bull calves are young, male cattle that have not been castrated and may be raised for meat. Dairy bull calves in this outbreak have also been purchased for use with 4-H projects [US government network of youth organizations whose curriculum focuses on science, healthy living, and citizenship].In interviews, ill people answered questions about any contact with animals and foods eaten in the week before becoming ill. Of the 19 people interviewed, 15 (79 per cent) reported contact with dairy bull calves or other cattle. Some of the ill people interviewed reported that they became sick after their dairy bull calves became ill or died.One ill person's dairy calves were tested for the presence of salmonella bacteria. This laboratory testing identified _S._ Heidelberg in the calves. Further testing using WGS showed that isolates from ill people are closely related genetically to isolates from these calves. This close genetic relationship means that the human infections in this outbreak are likely linked to ill calves.As part of routine surveillance, the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene, one of 7 regional labs affiliated with CDC's Antibiotic Resistance Laboratory Network, conducted antimicrobial resistance testing on clinical isolates from the ill people associated with this outbreak. These isolates were found to be resistant to antimicrobials and shared the same DNA fingerprints, showing the isolates were likely related to one another. WGS identified multiple antimicrobial resistance genes in outbreak-associated isolates from 15 ill people and 8 cattle. This correlated with results from standard antimicrobial resistance testing methods used by CDC's National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS) laboratory on clinical isolates from 2 ill people in this outbreak. The 2 isolates tested were susceptible to gentamicin, azithromycin, and meropenem. Both were resistant to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, ampicillin, cefoxitin, ceftriaxone, chloramphenicol, nalidixic acid, streptomycin, sulfisoxazole, tetracycline, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and had reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin. Antimicrobial resistance limits treatment options and has been associated with increased risk of hospitalization, bloodstream infections, and treatment failures in patients.Traceback information available at this time indicates that most calves in this outbreak originated in Wisconsin. Wisconsin health and agriculture officials continue to work with other states to identify herds that may be affected. This investigation is ongoing. CDC will provide updates when more information is available.--communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This small outbreak is, at this point, related to contact with dairy bull calves, but if the infected cattle are used for meat, undercooked beef may also be relevant. It is important to note that in most individuals who have salmonellosis, the enteritis has resolved before the diagnosis is made and no antimicrobial intervention is needed. In invasive salmonellosis, however, multidrug resistant isolates limit the choices for treatment.Among the 3 antimicrobials (azithromycin, gentamicin, and meropenem) to which the outbreak strain of _S._ Heidelberg is susceptible, azithromycin is the only one that can be given orally. None of the 3 is considered 1st line treatment for salmonellosis. - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.]
