GI [in Portuguese, trans. Mod.TY, edited]<http://g1.globo.com/sao-paulo/sao-jose-do-rio-preto-aracatuba/noticia/2016/11/severinia-e-cajobi-confirmam-mortes-de-macacos-por-febre-amarela.html>Another 2 cities in the northeastern region of Sao Paulo [state; SP] confirmed that yellow fever was the cause of death of monkeys found in the rural areas of the 2 municipalities. Residents and authorities of SeverÌ nia (SP) and Cajobi (SP) are on alert, and preventive actions are now being carried out in the cities.Severinia Epidemiological Surveillance awaits the results for the other animal that was found dead in the same locality on 3 Nov 2016 in a forest known as Matinha do RubÌ£o, located next to an urban area. Since 28 Oct [2016], when the animal was found dead, the municipality has been carrying out preventive campaigns.In Cajobi (SP), Epidemiological Surveillance also confirmed yellow fever as the cause of death in a monkey that was found dead on the farm ""Ranch of the Monkeys"" on 20 Oct [2016]. Samples were collected and sent to the Instituto Adolfo Lutz.The residents and property holders in localities near the farm have now been informed and vaccinated by Surveillance. According to the Secretariat, the property is located about 8 km from the urban area, and health authorities requested that the residents go to health units to update their vaccination cards.In addition to Cajobi and SeverÌ nia, 4 more municipalities in the northeastern region confirmed the death of monkeys from yellow fever. IbirÌÁ (SP), Rio Preto, Pindorama (SP) and Potirendaba (SP) are on the list of cities that are intensifying preventive actions.in SÌ£o JosÌ© do Rio Preto (SP), combat actions have been carried out since September [2016], after tests confirmed the death of a monkey due to yellow fever in the Vista Alegre TrÌ»s neighborhood. Mobilization over several days was done for fogging of the area and vaccination of the entire populace.In May of this year [2016], a 38-year-old man died of sylvan yellow fever. It is suspected that he contracted the disease in the Mata dos Macacos, which has visiting tourists from various cities in the region. During that time, technicians and agents of the Superintendent for Disease Control (SUCEN) were in the Mata dos Macacos and collected mosquitoes in order to find out whether they were infected by the virus. In the tests, none of the dead animals were found to be infected with the disease [virus].--Communicated by:ProMED-PORT <promed-port@promedmail.org>[Sporadic fatal cases of yellow fever in monkeys continue in this general area in Sao Paulo state. Other than the single human case cited above, there have been no reported human cases. The comments of Mod.RNA in 2 previous reports of this sylvan outbreak of yellow fever are instructive and are repeated here (in Portuguese, trans. Mod.TY):""It is worrisome that new epizootics (confirmed and suspected) in other municipalities, apparently with circulation of virus, in addition to being shown to be more intense, are occurring in diverse foci, and could suggest a tendency for expansion of the areas of active transmission.Despite being regions with circulation and transmission known in the distant and recent past, the evidence this year [2016] points to a circulation that is possibly more intense and, eventually, with a wider distribution. ProMED-PORT has been alerting and reporting in successive posts about the implications of this wider virus circulation and its close proximity to urban areas.It is difficult to say, however, what the determinants are that are causing this greater virus circulation. It is worth bringing up a comment of the wise ProMED-PORT moderator Professor Luis Jacintho (Mod.LJS) in a 2009 post: ""As I have already commented earlier, and will repeat again, yellow fever does not ""spread;"" it is always present in the south, only, for reasons still not well known, its transmission intensifies from time to time. - Mod.LJS.""Two points, one positive and the other negative, must be brought up:- Surveillance of epizootics apparently is sensitive and structured in SÌ£o Paulo state, making possible the early detection of yellow fever virus circulation, but...- The length of time to get (or give) the confirmed result, in this case nearly 3 months after suspected yellow fever in a non-human primate, can derail the adoption of necessary measures in a timely manner.Action to immunize susceptible [people] must be (in fact, they should have or could have been) intensified. [However], in this scenario, one should remember not only the need for awareness by the surveillance system (suspicion, reporting, investigation...) of suspected cases of yellow fever, but also (possible) occurrence of serious vaccine adverse events (especially neurotropic and viscerotropic disease) among (likely) many people (including those with contraindication to the vaccine) which will (necessarily or unnecessarily) result from vaccination. - Mod.RNA""Despite the delay in reporting laboratory results, the proactive barrier vaccination strategy has been a wise one for prevention of sylvan (forest) cycles of transmission spilling over into villages and towns and becoming urban cycles of human-mosquito-human transmission as happened in Paraguay in 2008. Urban outbreaks can become explosive in areas where people are not immunized, as happened recently in Angola.Maps of Brazil can be accessed at <http://s13.postimg.org/jumnalk87/map_of_Brazil.gif> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/33007>. - Mod.TY]
