Deccan Chronicle, Asian News International (ANI) report [edited]<http://www.deccanchronicle.com/lifestyle/health-and-wellbeing/021016/experts-say-chikungunya-can-also-affects-the-eye.html>According to Dr Sridevi Gunda, Ophthalmologist at iTek Vision Centre, Noida, eyes have also been seen to be affected [by chikungunya virus infections] in the form of conjunctivitis, uveitis, or episcleritis, retinitis, and optic neuritis wherein the white portion of the eye becomes red. This may or may not be associated with pain.She further said that in certain cases vision loss can be seen. In initial acute phase pain may be felt at the back of the eye. All the symptoms are self-limiting and paracetamol and certain NSAIDs [nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs] can provide symptomatic relief from fever and pain.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It would be of interest for health care providers to examine the eyes of individuals who have chikungunya virus infections. - Mod.TY]******[3] Congenital and perinatal complicationsDate: October 2016Source: International Journal of Infectious Diseases [edited]<http://www.ijidonline.com/article/S1201-9712(16)31166-3/fulltext>ref: Torres JR, Falleiros-Arlant LH, DueÌ±as L, et al: Congenital and perinatal complications of chikungunya fever: a Latin American experience. Int J Infect Dis. 2016; 51: 85-8----------------------------------------------------------------------Highlights----------- The effects of chikungunya fever (CHIKF) on pregnancy outcomes and its consequences for 169 symptomatic infants born to infected mothers at the peak of the epidemic wave in Latin America were analyzed.- Newborns with CHIKF seen at 4 large regional maternity hospitals in 3 different Central and South American countries were evaluated prospectively.- This study presents the largest series of symptomatic neonates with CHIKF analyzed so far in any region and the 1st involving infection by the Asian genotype of chikungunya virus. With few exceptions, the frequency of clinical findings seen in suspected cases was similar to that of confirmed patients in this series. Rash, hyperalgesia syndrome, and meningoencephalitis were significantly less common in the suspected cases in comparison to confirmed patients. Although clinical manifestations were similar to those reported previously, the percentage of neurological complications was lower. The case fatality rate was comparatively higher.Summary-------BackgroundDuring the years 2014 and 2015, the Region of the Americas underwent a devastating epidemic of chikungunya virus (CHIKV) of the Asian genotype, resulting in millions of affected individuals. However, epidemiological and clinical information on this experience is scarce. Prior knowledge of congenital and neonatal illness caused by CHIKV is limited and almost exclusively based on data obtained from a single outbreak of the East/Central/South African (ECSA) genotype. The effect of chikungunya fever (CHIKF) on pregnancy outcomes and its consequences for infants born to infected mothers at the peak of the epidemic wave in Latin America are reviewed herein. Epidemiological and clinical data on maternal and neonatal infections were collected prospectively and analyzed.Methods169 symptomatic newborns with CHIKF seen at 4 large regional maternity hospitals in 3 different Central and South American countries were evaluated prospectively. The outcomes of pregnancies in symptomatic infected mothers at 2 of these clinical centers were also analyzed.ResultsThe observed vertical transmission rate ranged between 27.7 percent and 48.29 percent. The incidence of congenital disease was unrelated to the use of cesarean section or natural delivery. The case fatality rate (CFR) at the only center that reported deaths was 5.3 percent. The most common clinical manifestations included fever, irritability, rash, hyperalgesia syndrome, diffuse limb edema, meningoencephalitis, and bullous dermatitis. Severe complications included meningoencephalitis, myocarditis, seizures, and acute respiratory failure. Leukocytosis with neutrophilia and normal or increased platelets was a common finding, and in those with signs of meningeal involvement, moderate lymphocytic pleocytosis with normal glucose and protein levels was typical.ConclusionsThis study presents the largest number of symptomatic neonates with CHIKF analyzed so far in any region and is the 1st involving infection with the Asian genotype of CHIKV. Although the clinical manifestations found were similar to those reported previously, the percentage of neurological complications was lower. The CFR was comparatively high. Chikungunya [virus infections] represented a substantial risk for neonates born to symptomatic parturients during the chikungunya outbreak in the Americas Region, with important clinical and public health implications.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This review is a helpful and interesting compilation of a large number of congenital and neonatal effects of CHIKV infections of pregnant women in the Americas. With CHIKV now having become endemic in the Americas, clinicians attending pregnant women and neonates need to be aware of the possibility of this virus infecting fetuses. - Mod.TY]******[4] Genotype in Rio de JaneiroDate: Thu 20 Oct 2016Source: bioRxiv [edited]<http://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/10/20/082131.abstract>ref: Manuele de Souza T, Leal de Azeredo E, Correa da Silva JB, et al: First report of the East-Central South African genotype of chikungunya virus in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. bioRxiv 2016: doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/082131----------------------------------------------------------------------BackgroundChikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arbovirus that causes an acute febrile syndrome with a severe and debilitating arthralgia. In Brazil, the Asian and East-Central South African (ECSA) genotypes are circulating in the north and northeast of the country, respectively. In 2015, the 1st autochthonous cases in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil were reported but until now the circulating strains have not been characterized. Therefore, we aimed here to perform the molecular characterization and phylogenetic analysis of CHIKV strains circulating in the 2016 outbreak that occurred in the municipality of Rio de Janeiro.MethodsThe cases analyzed in this study were collected at a private Hospital, from April 2016-May 2016, during the chikungunya outbreak in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. All cases were submitted to the Real Time RT-PCR for CHIKV genome detection and to anti-CHIKV IgM ELISA. Chikungunya [virus] infection was laboratorially confirmed by at least one diagnostic method and, randomly selected positive cases (n=10), were partially sequenced (CHIKV E1 gene) and analyzed.ResultsThe results showed that all the samples grouped in ECSA [East/Central/South African] genotype branch and the molecular characterization of the fragment did not reveal the A226V mutation in the Rio de Janeiro strains analyzed, but a K211T amino acid substitution was observed for the 1st time in all samples and a V156A substitution in 2 of 10 samples.ConclusionsPhylogenetic analysis and molecular characterization reveals the circulation of the ECSA genotype of CHIKV in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and 2 amino acids substitutions (K211T and V156A) exclusive to the CHIKV strains obtained during the 2016 epidemic, were reported.--Communicated by:Roland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>******[5] Factors affecting spreadDate: Mon 7 Nov 2016Source: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA (PNAS) [edited]<http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2016/11/02/1611391113>Salje H, Lessler J, Paul KK, et al: How social structures, space, and behaviors shape the spread of infectious diseases using chikungunya as a case study. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; pii: 201611391. [Epub ahead of print]----------------------------------------------------------------------SignificanceAlthough the determinants of infectious disease transmission have been extensively investigated in small social structures such as households or schools, the impact of the wider environment (such as, neighborhood) on transmission has received less attention. Here we use an outbreak of chikungunya as a case study where detailed epidemiological data were collected and combine it with statistical approaches to characterize the multiple factors that influence the risk of infectious disease transmission and may depend on characteristics of the individual (such as, age, sex), of his or her close relatives (such as, household members), or of the wider neighborhood. Our findings highlight the role that integrating statistical approaches with in-depth information on the at-risk population can have on understanding pathogen spread.AbstractWhether an individual becomes infected in an infectious disease outbreak depends on many interconnected risk factors, which may relate to characteristics of the individual (such as age, sex), his or her close relatives (such as household members), or the wider community. Studies monitoring individuals in households or schools have helped elucidate the determinants of transmission in small social structures due to advances in statistical modeling; but such an approach has so far largely failed to consider individuals in the wider context they live in. Here, we used an outbreak of chikungunya in a rural community in Bangladesh as a case study to obtain a more comprehensive characterization of risk factors in disease spread. We developed Bayesian data augmentation approaches to account for uncertainty in the source of infection, recall uncertainty, and unobserved infection dates. We found that the probability of chikungunya transmission was 12 percent [95 percent credible interval (CI): 8-17 percent] between household members but dropped to 0.3 percent for those living 50 m away (95 percent CI: 0.2-0.5 percent). Overall, the mean transmission distance was 95 m (95 percent CI: 77-113 m). Females were 1.5 times more likely to become infected than males (95 percent CI: 1.2-1.8), which was virtually identical to the relative risk of being at home estimated from an independent human movement study in the country. Reported daily use of anti-mosquito coils had no detectable impact on transmission. This study shows how the complex interplay between the characteristics of an individual and his or her close and wider environment contributes to the shaping of infectious disease epidemics.--Communicated by:Roland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[Studies like this one provide insight into how chikungunya virus circulates locally during an outbreak. This provides information that is useful to focus vector control efforts and avoidance of mosquito bites to reduce transmission. - Mod.TY]******[6] Persistent symptomsDate: Fri 28 Oct 2016Source: Healio Rheumatology [edited]<http://www.healio.com/rheumatology/infection/news/online/%7Bef7c93a9-44fb-4ce6-8a48-0522d9c0b2bf%7D/rheumatic-symptoms-may-persist-in-patients-with-chikungunya-for-more-than-1-year>Findings presented at ID Week confirmed 45.6 percent of 171 Colombian patients with chikungunya had rheumatic symptoms that persisted for more than 1 year. ""Chikungunya is an emerging arboviral disease endemic in tropical areas of Asia, Africa, and Latin America [that] is able not just to produce acute manifestations, but also chronic complications, such as rheumatological disease,"" Alfonso J. Rodriguez-Morales, told Healio Rheumatology. ""This study confirms that persistence of chikungunya-related chronic rheumatism would be evident more than a year after infection.""Rodriguez-Morales and colleagues assessed a cohort with the longest follow-up in Latin America. From 2015 to 2016, they examined 171 patients with chikungunya that persisted with post-chikungunya virus inflammatory rheumatism (pCHIK-CIR) for a minimum of 9.1 months and a maximum of 12.6 months. They identified pCHIK-CIR cases through telephone and excluded patients who presented with [infections from] other arboviruses during follow-up.They found 45.6 percent of patients reported pCHIK-CIR. All patients reported pain in the joints. In addition, 43.9 percent reported morning stiffness; 38.6 percent reported joint edema; and 19.9 percent reported joint redness. Of all patients, 21.1 percent required care and received it. Initial follow-up at 6.5 months showed a persistence of 53.7 percent in a group of 283 patients.Further, these results confirm previous meta-analyses conducted in France, India and other Colombian cohorts.""Although only published data from our group in Colombia is available for Latin America, this would be similar in other countries affected by chikungunya in the region,"" Rodriguez-Morales said. ""This would have significant implications in disability and related costs. Finally, travelers returning from endemic areas should be followed-up between 12 weeks and 12 months in order to assess this complication and proceed to early diagnosis and proper management.""[Byline: Will Offit]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is useful to have some statistics on more than 100 individuals 12 weeks-12 months following their chikungunya virus infections. Previous outbreak reports have stated that long-term arthralgias can persist for weeks to months. Now we have a more precise idea of the frequency of these occurrences. It would be of interest to know the cost of these persistent conditions, which can be incapacitating. - Mod.TY]
