Dabanga Sudan [edited]<https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/article/chemist-cyanide-mercury-catastrophic-environmental-risk-in-south-kordofan>An expert has warned of ""catastrophic environmental risks"" of the use of cyanide in mining and the serious effects on the population and the environment from processing factories in South Kordofan.In an interview with Radio Dabanga on Wednesday [7 Dec 2016], Dr Yasser Hamouda, a chemical researcher at the University of Chester in Britain, expressed alarm that the Sudanese government allows the use of highly toxic cyanide in mining. He highlighted the dangerous effects of cyanide on living organisms and the environment.Dr Hamouda said that most countries in the world countries have prohibited its use because it is difficult to control. He pointed out that it takes less than 2 grams of cyanide to kill humans and animals.In the interview, Dr Hamouda referred to the serious impact of the use of cyanide through experiments in countries such as Romania, New Guinea, the Philippines, and Argentina. He also warned of the risks of traditional mining to human health as a result of the use of mercury: ""The Sudanese government's allowing of this kind of mining without providing safety is irresponsible.""Dr Hamouda questions the government's motives for ""moving government mining residues from various regions of Sudan to South Kordofan. ""The government has begun establishing a Karta factory in Kadugli in South Kordofan where there are heavy rains.""He warns of dangers of cyanide penetrating ground water, contaminating wells and valleys that are a source of drinking water for humans and animals. He has pointed to the broad popular rejection of establishing Karta factories in the Abu Gubeiha and Alleray areas.The national committee for environmental advocacy and victims of mining in South Kordofan state have called upon the central government authorities to stop the mining companies from using cyanide.On Tuesday [6 Dec 2016], the committee's spokesman, Ahmad Mukhtar, told Radio Dabanga that various committees of the localities in the state called for a meeting on Sunday [11 Dec 2016] in Khartoum where they talked about the seriousness of these companies that operate without people's consent, and without control or respect for the environment. He says that there are more than 11 companies mining gold using cyanide in various areas of the state. He said that these companies do not enjoy consent from the local people but are granted licenses with the approval of the state government headed by Governor Eisa Abakar.Mukhtar accuses the state government of [abusing] divide and rule policies by tempting some native administrations to pass its agenda and decisions, which are rejected by the people of the state.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Both mercury and cyanide can be used to mine other metals and minerals. The combination of these can be detrimental to the people involved.Mercury-------There are 3 forms of mercury: elemental mercury, inorganic mercury, and organic mercury.Elemental mercury is also known as metallic mercury, liquid mercury, liquid silver, and quicksilver, and is an extremely heavy, odorless, silver-colored liquid. Mercury exists as a natural element in the earth's crust. Since this is the most likely form of mercury to which these children were exposed, this comment is confined to the toxicity of elemental mercury. There are several sources of elemental mercury, including broken mercury thermometers, broken fluorescent light bulbs, dental amalgam fillings, mercury-containing latex paints, extraction of gold from ore using mercury, and contaminated clothing from workers in thermometer-making plants. Elemental mercury is also used as a Mexican folk medicine to treat ""empacho,"" a chronic stomach disorder.Elemental mercury is the most commonly swallowed form of mercury, usually from a broken thermometer. Fortunately, elemental mercury is not absorbed from the stomach and will not cause any poisoning in a healthy person. The swallowed mercury is slippery, and will roll into the stomach, out into the bowels, and will be quickly eliminated without causing any symptoms. However, if the person has severe inflammatory bowel disease or a fistula (hole or opening) in their intestine, problems may result if the mercury is not all cleared out, resulting in prolonged exposure.Handling liquid mercury for a very short period of time usually does not result in any problems. An allergic rash is possible. Mercury is not well-absorbed through the skin, so skin contact is not likely to cause mercury poisoning, especially with a brief one-time exposure. Even if a person has cuts in the skin, mercury is too heavy to be contained by a cut. Merely washing the wound well will remove the mercury.Inhalation of elemental mercury vapors is the main cause of toxicity, as mercury is well absorbed through the lungs. Problems from inhalation result either from a large one-time exposure or a long-term exposure. A small, one-time exposure is not likely to cause problems.The lungs are the primary target organ following a large, one-time inhalation exposure of mercury vapor. Other signs and symptoms may develop as well. Clinical signs develop within a few hours and include chills, metallic taste, mouth sores, swollen gums, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, headache, weakness, confusion, shortness of breath, cough, chest tightness, bronchitis, pneumonia, and kidney damage.Long-term exposure of inhaled vapors is generally more dangerous, with the nervous system being the primary target organ of toxicity. Symptoms may occur within weeks but usually develop insidiously over a period of years. Neurologic symptoms include tremors, headaches, short-term memory loss, incoordination, weakness, loss of appetite, altered sense of taste and smell, numbness and tingling in the hands and feet, insomnia, and excessive sweating. Psychiatric effects are also seen after long-term exposure.Acrodynia is a condition of pain and dusky pink discoloration in the hands and feet, most often seen in children chronically exposed to heavy metals, especially with mercury. Acrodynia can result from repeated exposures to mercury-containing latex paint fumes. Acrodynia is usually seen in younger children. The symptoms include chills, sweating, body rash, irritability, sleeplessness, leg cramps, swelling of the cheeks, nose, hands, and feet, light sensitivity in the eyes, and peeling skin layers on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.People are regularly exposed to all 3 types of mercury, although the organic type is the most likely to cause adverse health effects because of its tendency to build up in the body.Mercury vapor is very dangerous. Symptoms of mercury poisoning are progressive. The 1st stage is paresthesia, distinguished by a tingling or numb sensation in the fingers, toes, and face. Paresthesia may be followed by difficulty walking and speaking, impaired vision and hearing, fatigue, and weakness, headache and trouble concentrating, and tremors. Methods of detoxification or treatment are limited. In this particular case, there may be some environmental cleanup issues.Cyanide-------Cyanide exists in several forms. While it is easy to remember it is a colorless, odorless gas, it is also available in crystalline form as potassium cyanide and sodium cyanide. These are generally the forms that are used in food, as this case appears to be. Consequently, a person may be exposed through inhalation or ingestion or through absorption through the skin on contact.Cyanide is used in manufacturing for making paper, textiles, and plastics. It is also in photographic developing chemicals, which may not be in great demand but are still around. Metallurgy employs cyanide salts for electroplating, metal cleaning, and removing gold from its ore. Cyanide gas is used to exterminate pests in ships and buildings. Cyanide is also found in chemicals, such as acetonitril-based products, which may be used to remove artificial nails, or perhaps polish. This is sometimes ingested.People exposed to a small amount of cyanide by inhalation, absorption, or ingestion may have some or all of the following symptoms within minutes: rapid breathing, restlessness, dizziness, weakness, headache, nausea and vomiting, and rapid heart rate. Exposure to a large amount of cyanide by any route may cause any of the following symptoms: convulsions, low blood pressure, slow heart rate, loss of consciousness, lung injury, and respiratory failure leading to death.Generally, treatment for cyanide poisoning must be given very swiftly, especially after ingestion. Unfortunately, specific antidotes are generally only available at a hospital. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy chambers have proven to be helpful. - Mod.TG][Maps of Sudan can be seen at <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/States_of_Sudan> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/30888>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/30888>.]
