Manitoulin [edited]<http://www.manitoulin.ca/2016/12/07/lyme-disease-island-veterinarian-warns-six-confirmed-cases-dogs/>The Expositor (news outlet) recently learned of an unusually high number of Lyme disease cases in dogs on Manitoulin this summer and fall [2016].""Lyme disease is present on Manitoulin Island,"" Doctor Janice Mitchell, a veterinarian at both the Island Animal Hospital and Scott Veterinary Services in Mindemoya, told The Expositor. ""This summer [2016], 5 cases have been confirmed at Scott Veterinary Services and one case at the Island Animal Hospital, with 5 of the 6 dogs never having left the island. The dogs were from Gore Bay, Birch Island, M'Chigeeng, South Baymouth (a Hurricane Katrina dog), Mindemoya and Evansville.""""This past summer, an 8-year-old spayed female golden retriever was presented at one of the Island veterinary clinics with a complaint of lameness,"" Dr. Mitchell said of one case. ""She has a fever and was sore in 3 of her limbs. Bloodwork revealed a high white blood cell count and a positive antibody tied to _Borrelia burgdoferi_, otherwise known as Lyme disease.""Dr. Mitchell said this is high for Manitoulin and that traditionally Lyme disease in Ontario has been seen in pocketed areas at Rondeau Provincial Park, Point Pelee, Long Point and the Kingston/Gananoque region.""However, ticks are on the move, at 46 km per year to be exact, and the tick that is responsible for transmitting the Lyme is the deer tick, known as _Ixodes scapularis_,"" added Dr. Mitchell. ""We are just seeing more and more ticks in the area; they are moving north. Typically, we find that there will be a bad tick year, but with climate change and deer and humans colliding more, we are seeing a rise.""""Lyme disease (named for the Connecticut town of Lyme) is caused by a bacterial organism called _Borrelia burgdoferi_,"" Dr. Mitchell said. ""It is transmitted to mammals through a blood sucking vector, the deer tick. The deer tick is a 3-host tick which means each growth phase (larva, nymph, adult) will molt off the host between their requisite blood meal on 3 separate mammals. A female tick will lay approximately 2000 eggs in spring, at temperatures 4 C [39 F] and above. The 6-legged larva hatches and attaches to a host as soon as it is able, usually a mouse. If the mouse is infected with the Lyme disease bacteria, the larva will be infected. It takes up to one year to molt into an 8-legged nymph. In spring, the nymph may seek another mouse or a larger host such as a human or dog. It has its blood meal and then drops off until late summer, when it molts into an adult. The adult then seeks a larger host, hence its name the ""deer tick."" At any phase in its development, the tick can transmit the Lyme bacteria during the blood sucking phase on its host. This process of transmission can take 24-48 hours, which means that if the tick is removed in this window, the bacteria cannot be transmitted"" [Some papers have reported transmission after 6 hours of attachment. The tick must be removed before 24 hours, and even then, there is a risk. 30 percent of patients contracting Lyme disease never recall a tick bite at all. - Mod.TG].Dr. Mitchell said that Lyme disease manifests itself differently in dogs compared to humans. ""After being bitten by an infected tick, 80-90 percent of humans are likely to develop the disease, whereas dogs are 5 to 10 percent likely (even less in cats),"" she said. ""In those canines that do develop the illness, it doesn't manifest for weeks or months after infection, at which point arthritis signs are noticed. Sometimes there is a fever, and in longer standing untreated cases, kidney damage can occur. Dogs do not develop the classic bull's eye rash as is noted with humans.""Luckily, Dr. Mitchell said testing for Lyme disease in dogs is simple and quick. ""The same test for heart worm, 4DX, also tests for Lyme disease and 2 other tick diseases. It is a 10-minute blood test that detects antibodies against the organism. Once positive and if showing clinical signs, treatment consists of an inexpensive course of proper antibiotics.""The Lyme disease incidents on the island will be reported to the Ontario Animal Health Network, but the incident isn't directly reported to the Sudbury and District Health Unit (SDHU).The Expositor contacted the SDHU to see whether there was a corresponding high number of humans diagnosed with Lyme disease this fall [2016] and whether the public should be concerned.""We haven't had any confirmed black legged ticks (deer ticks) on Manitoulin this fall [2016],"" said Jon Groulx, an environment support officer with the SDHU. ""There have been no confirmed human cases of Lyme disease on Manitoulin, though there have been confirmed black legged ticks and humans with Lyme disease in the SDHU catchment area"" [While he has not confirmed any black-legged ticks, clearly, there are some in the area. Also, people and pets are mobile, so they don't have to acquire the ticks in their own neighborhoods. - Mod.TG].When asked whether the high number of dog cases has led to concern at the SDHU, Mr. Groulx said: ""We regularly educate the public about how to prevent ticks and how to remove one"" [There must be some concern, or he would not be regularly educating tick prevention. - Mod.TG]. He said that they also do tick dragging to determine whether there is an issue in an area, but that now isn't a prime time to do so. [Again, just because he is not dragging for ticks does not mean that they are not there, because we live in a mobile society that can easily bring them back to local areas from any trip. - Mod.TG].Mr. Groulx confirmed that there had been an increase of black legged ticks submitted for testing with the SDHU but said he couldn't speculate on this being due to a high number of ticks or people being more vigilant [If a high number have been submitted, then the ticks are likely in the area. - Mod.TG].People can submit ticks to the SDHU (locally in Mindemoya) to test whether it is a deer tick. If it is confirmed as a deer tick (black legged tick), it is sent for further testing to see whether it has the Lyme disease bacteria.""To help prevent ticks and Lyme disease, we recommend people check for ticks when they come in from outdoors,"" said Mr. Groulx. ""We also suggest people wear long sleeves and tuck their pants into their socks and wear Health Canada approved bug spray.""To prevent ticks from biting dogs, Dr. Mitchell suggested considering a veterinary approved safe treatment against ticks.""There are several that are being prescribed in the Canadian veterinary field and exist as a pill or topical treatment administered monthly to every 3 months. Also, it is wise to go through your dog's coat with a fine-tooth comb, a flea comb, after any outdoor hikes to look for ticks and remove promptly,"" said Dr. Mitchell. ""The sooner you remove, the less time for Lyme transmission. To remove a tick, simply grasp it with tweezers close to its attachment to the skin and gently twist until the tick dislodges. You must make sure that the entire tick, head and body is removed. Finally, for dogs visiting endemic areas of Lyme disease in Ontario, there are newer vaccines that have emerged.""Ms. Mitchell recommended visiting <http://www.oahn.ca> for more information about the prevalence of Lyme disease in Ontario and also noted that any questions will be welcomed at either vet clinic on the island.[Byline: Robin Burridge]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Lyme disease is caused by 4 main species of bacteria: _Borrelia burgdorferi_, _B. mayonii_, _B. afzelii_, and _B. garinii_. _B. burgdorferi_ and _B. mayonii_ cause Lyme disease in the United States, while _B. afzelii_, and _B. garinii_ are the leading causes of Lyme disease in Europe and Asia. The most common tickborne illness in these regions, Lyme disease is transmitted by the bite of an infected black-legged tick, commonly known as a deer tick.Lyme disease in pets----------------Lyme disease is transmitted to dogs through the bite of a tick. Once in the bloodstream, the Lyme disease organism is carried to many parts of the body and is likely to localize in joints. It was 1st thought that only a few types of ticks could transmit this disease, but now it appears that several common species may be involved. The most common type of tick to carry Lyme disease is the deer tick or black-legged tick.If pets are diagnosed with Lyme disease, they cannot transmit it to people, but the tick must bite the person.Symptoms of Lyme disease are more difficult to detect in animals than in people. The characteristic rash does not develop in dogs or cats. Because the other symptoms of the disease may be delayed or go unrecognized and because the symptoms are similar to those of many other diseases, Lyme disease in animals is often not considered until other diseases have been eliminated.Many dogs affected with Lyme disease are taken to a veterinarian because they seem to be experiencing generalized pain and have stopped eating. Affected dogs have been described as if they were ""walking on eggshells."" Often these pets have high fevers. Dogs may also begin limping. This painful lameness often appears suddenly and may shift from one leg to another. If untreated, it may eventually disappear, only to recur weeks or months later.Some pets are infected with the Lyme disease organism for over a year before they finally show signs. By this time, the disease may be widespread throughout the body.Dogs with lameness, swollen joints, and fever are suspected of having Lyme disease. However, other diseases may also cause these symptoms. There are 2 blood tests that may be used for confirmation. The 1st is an antibody test. This test does not detect the actual spirochete in the blood but does detect the presence of antibodies created by exposure to the organism. A test can be falsely negative if the dog is infected but has not yet formed antibodies, or if it never forms enough antibodies to cause a positive reaction. This may occur in animals with suppressed immune systems. Some dogs that have been infected for long periods of time may no longer have enough antibodies present to be detected by the test. Therefore, a positive test is meaningful, but a negative is not.The 2nd test is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, a DNA test that is very specific and sensitive. However, not all dogs have the spirochete in their blood cells. If a blood sample is tested, a false negative may occur. The best sample for PCR testing is the fluid from an affected joint.Because the Lyme spirochete is a bacterium, it can be controlled by antibiotics. However, a lengthy course of treatment is necessary to completely eradicate the organism. The initial antibiotic selected to treat an infected pet may not be effective against the disease, especially if the infection is long-standing. In this situation, changing to another antibiotic is often effective. Occasionally, the initial infection will recur, or the pet will become re-infected by being bitten by another infected tick.The key to prevention is keeping your dog from being exposed to ticks. Ticks are found in grassy, wooded, and sandy areas. They find their way onto an animal by climbing to the top of a leaf, blade of grass, or short trees, especially cedar trees. Here they wait until their sensors detect an approaching animal on which to crawl or drop. Keeping animals from thick underbrush reduces their exposure to ticks. Dogs should be kept on trails when walked near wooded or tall grass areas. Vaccination against Lyme disease is recommended for pets that live in endemic areas or that travel to areas where Lyme disease is prevalent.Check your pet immediately after it has been in a tick-infected area. The deer tick is a small tick and only about pinhead size in juvenile stage, but a little more obvious in adult phase and after feeding. If you find a tick moving on your pet, the tick has not fed. Remove the tick promptly and place it in rubbing alcohol or crush it between two solid surfaces. If you find a tick attached to your pet, grasp the tick with fine tweezers or your finger nails near the dog's skin and firmly pull it straight out. Make sure you protect your fingers from exposure by using a tissue or a disposable glove. You may need another person to help restrain your dog. Removing the tick quickly is important since the disease does not appear to be transmitted until the tick has fed for approximately 12 hours. If you crush the tick, do not get the tick's contents, including blood, on your skin. The spirochete that causes Lyme disease can pass through a wound or cut in your skin.A safe and effective vaccine is available for protecting dogs against Lyme disease. This vaccine is initially given twice, at 2- to 3-week intervals. Annual revaccination is necessary to maintain immunity. Vaccination against Lyme disease will be determined by your pet's lifestyle and individual risk assessment. Be sure to discuss any questions you may have regarding the type and frequency of vaccination with your veterinarian.There are also topical products and oral products to prevent fleas and ticks. Some products include Bravecto, NexGuard, and Advantix.The best prevention may be a combination of vaccination, topical, or oral products and frequent and thorough examinations of your pet for ticks.Lyme disease in people----------------------The signs and symptoms of Lyme disease vary and usually appear in stages.A small, red bump often appears at the site of a tick bite or tick removal and resolves over a few days. This is normal after a tick bite and does not indicate Lyme disease. However, these signs and symptoms may occur within a month after you've been infected:Early signs and symptoms------------------------- Rash. From 3 to 30 days after an infected tick bite, an expanding red area might appear that sometimes clears in the center, forming a bull's-eye pattern. The rash (erythema migrans) expands slowly over days and can spread to 12 inches (30 centimeters) across. It is typically not itchy or painful.Erythema migrans is one of the hallmarks of Lyme disease. Some people develop this rash at more than one place on their bodies.- Flu-like symptoms. Fever, chills, fatigue, body aches, and a headache may accompany the rash.Later signs and symptoms------------------------If untreated, new signs and symptoms of Lyme infection might appear in the following weeks to months. These include:- Erythema migrans appearing in other areas of your body.- Joint pain. Bouts of severe joint pain and swelling are especially likely to affect your knees, but the pain can shift from one joint to another.- Neurological problems. Weeks, months, or even years after infection, you might develop inflammation of the membranes surrounding your brain (meningitis), temporary paralysis of one side of your face (Bell's palsy), numbness or weakness in your limbs, and impaired muscle movement.Signs and symptoms caused by the bacterium _B. mayonii_ may also include nausea and vomiting, and diffuse rashes (rather than a single bull's-eye rash commonly associated with Lyme disease)Several weeks after infection, some people develop:- Heart problems, such as an irregular heartbeat. Heart problems rarely last more than a few days or weeks.- Eye inflammation.- Liver inflammation (hepatitis).- Severe fatigue.Only a minority of blacklegged tick bites lead to Lyme disease. The longer the tick remains attached to your skin, the greater your risk of getting the disease. Lyme infection is unlikely if the tick is attached for less than 36 to 48 hours.If you think you've been bitten and have signs and symptoms of Lyme disease -- particularly if you live in an area where Lyme disease is prevalent -- contact your doctor. Treatment for Lyme disease is more effective if begun early.See your doctor even if symptoms disappear. It's important to consult your doctor even if signs and symptoms disappear -- the absence of symptoms doesn't mean the disease is gone. Left untreated, Lyme disease can spread to other parts of your body from several months to years after infection, causing arthritis and nervous system problems. Ticks also can transmit other illnesses, such as babesiosis and Colorado tick fever.Left untreated, Lyme disease can cause:- Chronic joint inflammation (Lyme arthritis), particularly of the knee.- Neurological symptoms, such as facial palsy and neuropathy.- Cognitive defects, such as impaired memory.- Heart rhythm irregularitiesThe variable signs and symptoms of Lyme disease are nonspecific and often are found in other conditions, so diagnosis can be difficult. What's more, the ticks that transmit Lyme disease also can spread other diseases at the same time.If you don't have the characteristic Lyme disease rash, your doctor might ask about your medical history, including whether you've been outdoors in the summer where Lyme disease is common, and do a physical exam.Diagnosis---------Lab tests to identify antibodies to the bacteria can help confirm the diagnosis. These tests are most reliable a few weeks after an infection, after your body has had time to develop antibodies. They include:- Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test. The test used most often to detect Lyme disease, ELISA detects antibodies to _B. burgdorferi_. But because it can sometimes provide false-positive results, it's not used as the sole basis for diagnosis. This test might not be positive during the early stage of Lyme disease, but the rash is distinctive enough to make the diagnosis without further testing in people who live in areas infested with ticks that transmit Lyme disease.- Western blot test. If the ELISA test is positive, this test is usually done to confirm the diagnosis. In this 2-step approach, the Western blot detects antibodies to several proteins of _B. burgdorferi_.Treatment and drugs-------------------Antibiotics are used to treat Lyme disease. In general, recovery will be quicker and more complete the sooner treatment begins.Antibiotics- Oral antibiotics. These are the standard treatment for early-stage Lyme disease. These usually include doxycycline for adults and children older than 8, or amoxicillin or cefuroxime for adults, younger children, and pregnant or breast-feeding women. A 14- to 21-day course of antibiotics is usually recommended, but some studies suggest that courses lasting 10 to 14 days are equally effective.- Intravenous antibiotics. If the disease involves the central nervous system, your doctor might recommend treatment with an intravenous antibiotic for 14 to 28 days. This is effective in eliminating infection, although it may take you some time to recover from your symptoms. Intravenous antibiotics can cause various side effects, including a lower white blood cell count, mild to severe diarrhea, or colonization or infection with other antibiotic-resistant organisms unrelated to Lyme.- After treatment, a small number of people still have some symptoms, such as muscle aches and fatigue. The cause of these continuing symptoms, known as post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome, is unknown, and treating with more antibiotics doesn't help. Some experts believe that certain people who get Lyme disease are predisposed to develop an autoimmune response that contributes to their symptoms. More research is needed.BismacineThe Food and Drug Administration warns against the use of bismacine, an injectable compound prescribed by some alternative medicine practitioners to treat Lyme disease. Bismacine, also known as chromacine, contains high levels of the metal bismuth. Although bismuth is safely used in some oral medications for stomach ulcers, it's not approved for use in injectable form or as a treatment for Lyme disease. Bismacine can cause bismuth poisoning, which may lead to heart and kidney failure.Prevention----------The best way to prevent Lyme disease is to avoid areas where deer ticks live, especially wooded, bushy areas with long grass. You can decrease your risk of getting Lyme disease with some simple precautions:- Cover up. When in wooded or grassy areas, wear shoes, long pants tucked into your socks, a long-sleeved shirt, a hat, and gloves. Try to stick to trails and avoid walking through low bushes and long grass. Keep your dog on a leash.- Use insect repellents. Apply insect repellent with a 20 percent or higher concentration of DEET to your skin. Parents should apply repellant to their children, avoiding their hands, eyes, and mouth. Keep in mind that chemical repellents can be toxic, so follow directions carefully. Apply products with permethrin to clothing or buy pretreated clothing.- Do your best to tick-proof your yard. Clear brush and leaves where ticks live. Keep woodpiles in sunny areas.- Check yourself, your children, and your pets for ticks. Be especially vigilant after spending time in wooded or grassy areas. Deer ticks are often no bigger than the head of a pin, so you may not discover them unless you search carefully.It's helpful to shower as soon as you come indoors. Ticks often remain on your skin for hours before attaching themselves. Showering and using a washcloth might remove unattached ticks.- Don't assume you're immune. You can get Lyme disease more than once.- Remove a tick as soon as possible with tweezers. Gently grasp the tick near its head or mouth. Don't squeeze or crush the tick, but pull carefully and steadily. Once you've removed the entire tick, dispose of it and apply antiseptic to the bite area.Portions of this comment were extracted from: <http://www.vcahospitals.com/main/pet-health-information/article/animal-health/lyme-disease-in-dogs/837> and <http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lyme-disease/basics/definition/con-20019701>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/260>.]
