Fortune Keogh funeral Home [edited]<http://fortunekeoughfuneralhome.com/book-of-memories/2784642/Debbie-Dr-John/obituary.php>Dr John G ""Jack"" Debbie, 80, of 148 Duprey St, Saranac Lake [New York state], died peacefully on Sun 4 Dec 2016 at Mercy Healthcare in Tupper Lake [NY]. Born in New York City on 21 May 1936, he was the son of Dr and Mrs Anthony Gerald Debbie (O'Reilly). Jack grew up in Plainfield, NJ and White Plains NY where he attended Archbishop Stepinac High School and graduated in 1954.Jack attended Georgetown University and graduated from Seton Hall University in 1958. He then moved to Saranac Lake to work as a fisheries biologist for the New York State Conservation Department. In Saranac Lake Jack met the love of his life Janet Mary Munn. Jack and Janet were married at St Bernards Church on 12 Sep 1959. Jack then took his new bride on what would become a lifetime of adventure that would eventually lead them back to the mountain town that they both considered home.Jack studied white tailed deer populations at the Adirondack League Club while working on his Masters in Wildlife Biology at Cornell University. He graduated in 1962 and Jack and Janet moved to the University of Guelph in Ontario Canada where Jack attended the Ontario Veterinary College (OVC). Jack graduated with a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine degree from OVC in 1965. Part of Jack's studies at OVC included extensive work on zoonotic disease in deer.Jack and Janet then moved to Albany, NY where Jack took a position as an associate research scientist with the NYS Dept of Health. This was the beginning of a career of public service that would last for over 3 decades. In 1968 Jack and Janet took their new family to Nairobi, Kenya in East Africa. There Jack worked on a UN [United Nations] funded project to study the effects of new game parks on the biology of African wildlife. The family returned to the US in 1970 and Jack took a position as head of the state rabies section of the NYS Dept. of Health in Guilderland, NY. There Jack began his long career studying the biology of the rabies virus and its impact on both wildlife and human populations. He authored many papers and mentored many students about this deadly neurological disease. This work included the development of an oral rabies vaccine program that has since been deployed here in the US and in some European countries with the goal of eradication of the disease in the wild.In 1979 Jack and Janet were able to settle with their family back in Saranac Lake where Jack took a position as the Public Health Director for Franklin County. In 1986 he traveled to Geneva, Switzerland to work for 2 years on an UN-funded position with the World Health Organization working on the eradication of rabies in underdeveloped countries. Following his work with WHO Jack took his final position with the state as the NYS Public Health Veterinarian based in Albany. Throughout his years as a research scientist and public speaker he published many scholarly articles and several textbook chapters. In 1996 after 31 years of public service he reluctantly settled into retirement where he lived out the remainder of his life with Janet close by his side at their home on the shores of Lake Flower [NY].--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Surely this veterinarian and his insights into the biology of wildlife will be missed. We owe him a lot for his foresight to develop an oral rabies vaccine. Rest in peace. - Mod.TG].................................................tg/ao/ml"
