Record-Eagle [edited]<http://www.record-eagle.com/news/local_news/botulism-strikes-dunes/article_e6911026-e911-57d6-8e0d-b0985350520a.html>Two researchers are monitoring the Lake Michigan coast where dead birds have washed up.Dan Ray of the National Park Service and Jeanie Williams of the Inland Seas Education Association walked a beach in Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore littered with about 2 dozen dead birds including scoters, loons and ducks.Researchers say the birds are dying because of a toxin called avian botulism, which can form on the lake bed under certain conditions.Standing over a dead duck, Ray described what he saw, and the procedure that followed.""So we have a long-tailed duck, and we're going to pick that up away from the shoreline, take it up into the foredune,"" Ray said. ""And then we dig a hole 2 feet [60 cm] deep, and bury it so that it's away from park visitors and pets and no longer a threat to public health.""Botulism forms when there's a lack of oxygen in the water. For that to happen, it takes a long chain reaction that begins with invasive zebra and quagga mussels filtering the water, increasing its clarity.""The mussels are eating all this stuff, and then they produce waste like all living things do, and that waste has all kinds of nutrients in it ... lots of nitrogen, lots of phosphorous,"" Williams said. ""And because there's a lot of nutrients at the bottom of the lake, and a lot of sunlight, that means the algae can grow as much as they possibly can.""The native algae thrive on those nutrients and the additional sunlight, growing prolifically over the summer months. However, living algae pose no issue. It's not until they die that they become a problem.Harvey Bootsma is an associate professor at the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee. He said the northern part of Lake Michigan is the perfect place for botulism to thrive.""One thing that's unique about the north end of the lake, especially in the Sleeping Bear region, is that the bottom of the lake -- the lake topography or what we call bathymetry -- is quite variable up there,"" Bootsma says, ""so you have a lot of these pockets in the bottom of the lake ... little valleys that are formed all over the place.""When the dead algae collect in these pockets and decomposes, they use up the nearby oxygen, creating ideal conditions for botulism.Down near these toxic valleys many small fish continue to eat, consuming the poison as they feed.Local and migratory birds that land on Lake Michigan, tired and famished from their journey, consume small fish such as the invasive round goby. Having eaten the infected fish, the birds become sick and die out on the lake due to paralyzing effects.Local waterfowl populations could be threatened by the presence of botulism, especially since some of them are already endangered.Bootsma said that both the piping plover and common loon populations in the Sleeping Bear Dunes area have been significantly affected.Despite the negative effects that botulism is having on wildlife, Ray emphasized that so long as it isn't ingested, it poses no threat to humans.[Byline: Sam Corden]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Avian botulism is a paralytic disease caused by ingestion of a toxin produced by the bacterium, _Clostridium botulinum_. This bacterium is widespread in soil and requires warm temperatures, a protein source, and an anaerobic (no oxygen) environment in order to become active and produce toxin. Decomposing vegetation and invertebrates combined with warm temperatures can provide ideal conditions for the botulism bacteria to activate and produce toxin. There are several types of toxin produced by strains of these bacteria; birds are most commonly affected by type C and to a lesser extent type E.Birds either ingest the toxin directly or may eat invertebrates (such as chironomids, fly larvae) containing the toxin. Invertebrates are not affected by the toxin and store it in their body. A cycle develops in a botulism outbreak when fly larvae (maggots), feed on animal carcasses and ingest toxin. Birds that consume toxin-laden maggots can develop botulism after eating as few as 3 or 4 maggots.Host----- Type C toxin: waterfowl, shorebirds, colonial waterbirds, and others- Type E toxin: gulls, loons, and othersClinical signs/field signs--------------------------Healthy birds, affected birds, and dead birds in various stages of decay are commonly found in the same area. The toxin affects the nervous system by preventing impulse transmission to muscles. Birds are unable to use their wings and legs normally or control the third eyelid, neck muscles, and other muscles. Birds with paralyzed neck muscles cannot hold their heads up and often drown. Death can also result from water deprivation, electrolyte imbalance, respiratory failure, or predation.Lesions-------There are no specific lesions associated with this disease. Diagnosis of botulism is based on demonstration of the toxin in serum from sick birds, or tissue samples from dead birds such as clotted heart blood, stomach contents, or liver.Wildlife management significance--------------------------------Outbreaks occur from coast to coast in the United States and Canada, generally from July through September. Thousands of birds may die during a single outbreak.Prompt removal and proper disposal of carcasses by burial or burning (in accordance with applicable ordinances) is highly effective in removing toxin and maggot sources from the environment. If possible avoid altering water depth by flooding or drawing down water levels during hot weather. This may increase invertebrate and fish die-offs, a protein source for the bacteria.Providing mildly affected birds with fresh water, shade and protection from predators may help them recover from the intoxication. Botulism antitoxin is available but requires special handling and must be given early in the intoxication. Birds that survive a botulism outbreak are NOT immune to botulism toxinPortions of this comment have been extracted from<https://www.nwhc.usgs.gov/disease_information/avian_botulism/>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/5861>.]
