WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited]<http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/>Influenza update - 278 (based on data up to 27 Nov 2016)--------------------------------------------------------Summary-------Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere increased slightly.- In North America, influenza activity slightly increased with influenza A(H3N2) virus predominating. Influenza-like illness (ILI) levels remained below seasonal thresholds. In the United States, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity continued to be reported.- In Europe, influenza activity was low but has started to rise, particularly in Northern European countries. Influenza A viruses were predominating with the most frequent subtype being A(H3N2). The season has started earlier than usual with a positivity rate of more or equal 10 percent for influenza among sentinel surveillance samples.- In East Asia, influenza activity increased slightly with influenza A(H3N2) remaining the dominant virus circulating.- In Western Asia influenza detections remained low.- In Northern Africa, influenza detections increased in Morocco with influenza A(H3N2) viruses dominating.- In the Caribbean countries, influenza and other respiratory virus activity remained low. In Central America, there was a slight decrease in influenza and other respiratory viruses' activity. RSV continued to circulate in Costa Rica.- In tropical South America, influenza and other respiratory viruses' activity remained low with exception of Colombia where RSV activity continued to be reported.- In Southern Asia, there was a slight increase in influenza detections in both Iran and Sri Lanka with influenza A(H3N2) as the most frequently detected virus in this region.- In South East Asia, influenza activity continued to be reported at low levels, with influenza A(H3N2) virus predominant in the region. A slight increase in influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 detections was reported in Vietnam.- In West Africa, influenza detections increased in Ghana with B viruses dominating.- In Southern Africa, influenza activity continued at inter-seasonal levels.- In temperate South America, influenza and RSV activity continued to decrease throughout the sub-region.- In Oceania, influenza virus activity was reported at inter-seasonal levels.National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 80 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 14 Nov 2016 to 27 Nov 2016 (data as of 9 Dec 2016 03:37:55 UTC). The WHO GISRS laboratories tested more than 93 152 specimens during that time period. Up to 6209 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 5630 (90.7 percent) were typed as influenza A and 579 (9.3 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 112 (2.9 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 3787 (97.1 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 46 (36.2 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 81 (63.8 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Expected increase in seasonal influenza reported from most of northern hemisphere with Influenza A/H3N2 subtype and Influenza B- Victoria lineage predominating. - Mod.UBA][2] Costa RicaDate: Sat 10 Dec 2016Source: The Tico Times News [edited]<http://www.ticotimes.net/2016/12/10/influenza-deaths-costa-rica>Health Minister Fernando Llorca reported that 10 people died in Costa Rica due to health complications caused by the influenza virus in the past 6 weeks. At a press conference on [Fri 9 Dec 2016] evening, the minister said that the victims were between 4 months and 51-years-old. Up to 5 of them died at hospitals in the capital San JosÌ©, 4 in Alajuela, and 1 in Puntarenas.A total of 9 of cases were patients who presented health risk factors such as diabetes, hypertension, morbid obesity, or lung, heart or kidney disease. The Health Ministry reported in a news release that all the victims were infected with either the AH1N1 or the AH3N2 strains of the virus. None of them had been vaccinated against any seasonal strains of the virus, the ministry reported.The Alajuela patients lived in the Northern Zone communities of Florencia, Guatuso, Aguas Zarcas and Santa Rosa de Pocosol. The San JosÌ© victims lived in TibÌÁs and Goicoechea.The ministry also reported that there are 20 infected patients isolated inside a special room in the San Carlos Hospital, and that 2 of them are in critical condition.Rains and low temperatures--------------------------MarÌ a Villalta Bonilla, the Medical Manager of the Social Security System (Caja), said that the circulation of influenza viruses and respiratory diseases in the country occurs throughout the year, but rains and low temperatures increase the number of infected people. Costa Rica is currently in the transition between the rainy and the dry season. The National Meteorological Institute reported on [Fri 9 Dec 2016] that a cold front entering the country from the Gulf of Mexico will bring heavy rains and strong gusts of wind for a few more days in most of the country: the Northern Zone, the Caribbean Region, the Southern Pacific and the Central Valley.Caja data indicate that the number of cases recorded so far this year [2016] in the Northern Zone does not exceed the average for the region. However, officials expect an increase in cases due to rainy conditions in recent weeks, prompted by various weather phenomena including Hurricane Otto.Villalta said that Caja's hospitals in the region will operate as usual this month, both regular consultation services and emergency rooms.Between the 2nd week of December 2015 and the 2nd week of January 2016, public hospitals recorded an increase in cases of respiratory infections. The seasonal spike resulted in the death of 27 people during that period, the Caja noted.Recommendations---------------Officials from the Caja and the Health Ministry are calling on the population to exercise hygiene measures to prevent contagion. People should wash their hands frequently, cover their mouths and noses using the forearm or a tissue when sneezing, and avoid smoking.Authorities also ask people who have flu or cold symptoms to refrain from going to work, at least until coughing and sneezing ceases. In addition, they ask sick people to avoid visiting crowded locations such as concerts, sports events, shopping malls and churches.Villalta said that any person with a fever of 38 deg.C (100 deg.F) or above and presenting breathing problems should seek medical attention as soon as possible, with particular caution when the person has other special conditions. Children under 3, seniors over 65, overweight people, and people with transplants, immune system disorders, chronic respiratory or cardiac problems should be supervised with particular care.[Byline: L. Arias]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[A total of 9 out of the 10 fatal cases had co-morbid conditions and mainly influenza A/H1N1pdm(09) or A/H3N2 subtypes and had not received vaccination for seasonal influenza. - Mod.UBA][A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/17>.]
