MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ePub DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6549e1 [edited]<https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6549e1.htm#suggestedcitation>Cuevas EL, Tong VT, Rozo N, et al. Preliminary Report of Microcephaly Potentially Associated with Zika Virus Infection During Pregnancy -- Colombia, January-November 2016.[Results]The outbreak of Zika virus disease among pregnant women in Colombia peaked during epidemiologic week 4 in 2016. Reported cases of microcephaly peaked during epidemiologic week 28 in 2016 (24 weeks after the peak of reported cases of Zika virus disease). During epidemiologic weeks 5-45 in 2016, a total of 476 infants with microcephaly were reported in Colombia; 28 (85 percent) of the 33 reporting areas in Colombia reported at least one case of microcephaly. Overall, the prevalence of reported microcephaly was approximately 9.6 per 10 000 live births. Among areas reporting at least one case of microcephaly, the prevalence ranged from 2 per 10 000 live births (NariÌ±o and QuindÌ o) to 29 (Amazonas). Microcephaly cases were reported in areas that include locations over 2000 meters (6562 feet) above sea level (e.g., BogotÌÁ) without active Zika virus transmission; these cases, if Zika-related, likely resulted from travel-associated or sexually transmitted Zika virus infections.The prevalence of microcephaly increased more than 4-fold during epidemiologic weeks 5-45 in 2016 compared with the same period in 2015 (PR = 4.5). Peak prevalence of microcephaly was registered in July 2016, when the prevalence was 9-fold higher than in July 2015 (PR = 9.0). In 2016, among all microcephaly cases, 432 (91 percent) occurred in live born infants, and 44 (9 percent) occurred among pregnancy losses; in 2015, among 110 reported cases of microcephaly, 90 (82 percent) occurred in live born infants, and 20 (18 percent) occurred among pregnancy losses.Among the 476 infants and fetuses with microcephaly reported during epidemiologic weeks 5-45 in 2016, a total of 306 (64 percent) were tested for Zika virus infection; 147 (48 percent) had laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection by RT-PCR or immunohistochemistry on any placental, fetal, or infant specimen, and 5 of 6 tested had serologic evidence of infection by MAC-ELISA. Among 121 infants tested for other pathogens, 26 (21 percent) had evidence of infection with other pathogens, including toxoplasmosis (15 infants), herpes simplex (6), cytomegalovirus (4) and syphilis (1); among these 26 infants, 17 (65 percent) had evidence of co-infection with Zika virus (14 of 15 with toxoplasmosis, 2 of 6 with herpes, and 1 of 4 with cytomegalovirus). Neuroimaging results were available for 32 percent of all microcephaly cases. Among 476 infants or fetuses with microcephaly, mothers of 164 (34 percent) reported having symptoms compatible with Zika virus infection during pregnancy.DiscussionBased on an average full term gestation, the 24-week period from the peak of the Zika virus outbreak to the peak in reported microcephaly occurrence suggests that the greatest risk for microcephaly is associated with Zika virus infection during the 1st trimester and early in the 2nd trimester of pregnancy. During epidemiologic weeks 5-45, there was more than a 4-fold increase in reported microcephaly cases in Colombia in 2016, compared with the previous year. Although the microcephaly prevalence in 2016 among infants likely exposed to Zika virus in utero (9.6 per 10 000 live births) in Colombia was not much higher than the median of microcephaly prevalence (6.6 per 10 000 live births) reported by passive surveillance in 17 U.S. states during 2009-2013, the comparison with 2015 Colombia data indicates the magnitude of the increase.The Zika virus disease outbreak in the World Health Organization's Region of the Americas began in Brazil, which 1st reported a laboratory-confirmed Zika virus outbreak in May 2015; Colombia confirmed local transmission of Zika virus about 5 months later, in October 2015. In 2015, microcephaly prevalence in Brazil was 5.5 per 10 000 live births, representing an approximate 9-fold increase over the average prevalence during the previous 14 years (5.6). In Colombia, the relative increase has been smaller (4-fold); however, the baseline microcephaly prevalence was 2.1 per 10 000 live births in 2015, at least 3 times higher than Brazil's reported baseline. There are several possible reasons for differences between the reported baseline microcephaly prevalences in Brazil and Colombia, as well as the differences in increases of microcephaly in the context of the Zika virus outbreaks in the 2 countries. 1st, 50-75 percent of the population of Colombia reside at altitudes above 2000 meters, in areas without active, vector-borne Zika virus transmission. 2nd, microcephaly is a difficult birth defect to monitor because there are inconsistent definitions, obtaining accurate measurements is challenging, and terminology is inconsistent. Because of these challenges, prevalence estimates vary widely among countries and among surveillance systems within the United States. 3rd, the reports of microcephaly from Brazil might have served as an early warning. As evidence was emerging about the link between Zika virus infection and microcephaly, the Colombian Ministry of Health issued a recommendation in February 2016 advising women to consider delaying pregnancy for 6 months, which might have affected subsequent birth rates. The number of live births in Colombia during epidemiologic weeks 5-45 decreased by approximately 18 000 from 2015 to 2016.The findings in this report are subject to at least 4 limitations. 1st, the report includes all cases of microcephaly and not just those linked to Zika virus. The majority of cases of microcephaly lacked laboratory confirmation of Zika virus infection. Possible explanations are that specimens were not submitted for all cases, specimens that were submitted were not collected within the recommended time frames (maternal serum specimens within 5 days of date of symptom onset for rRT-PCR testing and infant serum or fetal tissue specimens within 2 days of delivery), and neuroimaging studies were not available for the majority of patients (68 percent). 2nd, ascertainment of birth defects, including microcephaly, tends to be more complete among live born infants than among pregnancy losses, because of the condition of the fetus at the time of the loss as well as the relatively infrequent use of fetal autopsy to determine the cause of fetal death, leading to underestimation of the number of cases of microcephaly, especially among pregnancy losses. In addition, because microcephaly is a rare outcome, prevalence ratios comparing 2016 and 2015 might be unstable and should be interpreted with caution. 3rd, passive reporting systems tend to have less complete ascertainment of all birth defects compared with active surveillance systems. Finally, the ascertainment of birth defects generally does not capture infants or fetuses whose birth defects are not apparent prenatally or at delivery, but rather are identified several months after birth. Certain critical outcomes, such as deceleration of brain growth among infants who are born with normal head circumferences, are not captured by this surveillance.Colombia's national population-based surveillance system for birth defects is based on passive reporting, which provides critical data for monitoring the impact of teratogens and describing trends but likely underestimates the actual prevalence of birth defects, including those defects associated with Zika virus infection during pregnancy. Also, Colombia's Zika virus surveillance is based on clinical symptoms, and asymptomatic Zika virus infections are not monitored by surveillance. Therefore, the overall percentage of women who are infected with Zika virus, or infected in early pregnancy or during the periconceptional period is unknown. To better understand the effects of Zika virus, INS and CDC are collaborating on ""Proyecto Vigilancia de Embarazadas con Zika"" (Enhanced Surveillance Project of Pregnant Women with Zika) to conduct intensified active monitoring in 3 cities in Colombia with high incidence of Zika virus disease in pregnant women. This project, which includes systematic collection of laboratory specimens for Zika virus testing, will provide more accurate estimates of the risk for microcephaly and other adverse birth outcomes among fetuses and infants of mothers with Zika virus disease during pregnancy.In the absence of a vaccine to prevent Zika virus infection or a specific medication for treatment, prevention strategies include avoiding travel to areas with active Zika virus transmission, preventing mosquito bites through personal protection and vector control, and avoiding sexual transmission. Ongoing population-based birth defects surveillance provides critical data for monitoring the impact of teratogens, including Zika virus infection, and will be an essential tool to evaluate success in preventing microcephaly and congenital Zika syndrome.--Communicated by:Roland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[There has been unofficial speculation about why the rates of Zika-related teratogenic effects appear to be higher in Brazil than in Colombia. The above report points out the difficulty in making valid comparisons between the 2 countries. The new surveillance study in the 3 Colombian cities should help to overcome some of the limitations mentioned above. - Mod.TY]******[3] Mother-fetal infection linkDate: Thu 8 Dec 2016Source: Lationos Health [edited]<http://www.latinoshealth.com/articles/19967/20161208/zika-virus-infections-more-data-show-viremia-mothers-fetal-infection.htm>Spanish researchers reported more evidence of Zika replication in the fetus or placenta, reporting persistent viremia lasting for more than 100 days after manifestation of symptom in a mother of a baby born with microcephaly.The patient in the Spanish report is a woman who contracted the Zika virus in December 2015 when she visited Colombia, her home country. The group reported the findings in a letter to the New England Journal of Medicine.According to CIDRAP News, her Zika symptoms began at 9 weeks pregnant, and blood tests for the virus came back positive for 89 consecutive days until she was 29 weeks. The reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test came back positive for 107 days after symptoms manifested. Tests from urine, vaginal, and endocervical samples came back negative.Fetal brain ultrasound at 12 and 15 weeks did not show any abnormalities, but repeat imaging tests at 20, 24, and 29 weeks revealed bilateral mild ventriculopathy and a shortened corpus callosum with parenchymal calcification and severe atrophy. The Zika viral load present in the mother's amniotic fluid was reported to be higher than that of the blood.The baby was delivered early at 37 weeks because of fetal growth restriction. At birth, all samples from the mother, including those from the placenta, tested negative for Zika. The baby's samples including cerebrospinal fluid were all negative for acute Zika infection. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the microcephaly diagnosis.The group also noted that an earlier report found Zika RNA in a pregnant woman's blood 8 weeks after symptoms manifested, and the new findings support the hypothesis that persistent viremia might reflect virus replication in the fetus or placenta.Researchers added that higher viral load in amniotic fluid, stable blood levels and negative urine findings also support virus replication in reservoirs such as the fetus or placenta. They concluded that persistent Zika RNA present in mother's blood may be a sign of fetal infection.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Negative findings in urine seem unusual, although the dates of sampling following the beginning of her symptoms are not given. It would be interesting to know whether infectious virus was recovered during the 107 days that she was RT-PCR positive. In the published report upon which the above article was drawn, (<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc1607580>), the summary states that persistent ZIKV RNA in maternal serum could be a sign of fetal infection, and thus the fetus may play a role in persistent maternal viremia. - Mod.TY]******[4] Effects on cell divisionDate: Mon 12 Dec 2016Source: ASCB [edited]<http://www.ascb.org/2016/in-the-news/on-the-way-to-causing-microcephaly-zika-blocks-centriole-biogenesis/>Recently, studies have shown that Zika can infect human neural stem cells growing as brain organoids and can block neurogenesis in mice. But the mechanisms the virus uses to disrupt brain development are not understood. However, at Tuesday's [6 Dec 2016] ASCB microsymposium on cell division in development and disease, Andrew Kodani discussed his latest findings: That Zika disrupts centriole biogenesis in a manner similar to the autosomal recessive disorder that causes primary microcephaly, or MCPH.His earlier work revealed that alterations in the links between centrioles, apical proteins, and cell fate can dynamically regulate brain size, it made sense to ask whether Zika-caused microcephaly followed the same pathway. In short, the answer appears to be ""yes.""Perhaps even more importantly, Kodani and his team found a tantalizing clue about a possible therapeutic agent: An anthracene compound that's been shown to stave off the effects of dengue [virus infection], which is in the same virus family as Zika [virus]. Kodani said that introducing as little as one micromolar of the compound ARDP0006 to his cell cultures blocked the accumulation of proteins that were preventing centrioles from duplicating. ""We can't vouch for its efficacy,"" he said. ""All we know is that it works in cell culture,"" he said.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Research on the cellular mechanisms leading to microcephaly continue, as illustrated by this interesting report above. One hopes that these studies can lead to an effective treatment or prevention for the teratogenesis that Zika virus infection causes. - Mod.TY]******[5] Hearing loss, adultsDate: Wed 7 Dec 2016Source: Clin Infect Dis. DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw770 [Epub ahead of print, edited]<http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2016/12/05/cid.ciw770.full.pdf+html?sid=5a1821b9-e18b-4d2f-9d73-db56c1829635>Eriko S Vinhaes, Luciane A Santos, Lislane Dias, Nilvano A Andrade, et al. Transient Hearing Loss in Adults Associated with Zika Virus Infection.IntroductionHere we report one confirmed and 2 probable acute ZIKAV cases based on clinical evaluation and serological exams with transient sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) supported by time-based audiometric exams, admitted between May and July 2015, during the ZIKAV outbreak in Bahia-Brazil.AbstractIn 2015, during the outbreak of ZIKAV in Brazil, we identified 3 cases of acute hearing loss after exanthematous illness. Serology yielded finding compatible with ZIKAV as the cause of a confirmed (1 patient) and a probable (2 patients) flavivirus infection, indicating an association between ZIKAV infection and transient hearing loss. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall[Zika virus infections continue to cause newly described lesions, such as sensorineural hearing loss presented above. ProMED-mail subscribers interested in the clinical details are urged to access the complete reports at the above URLs. - Mod.TY]******[6] Ocular effects, adultDate: Wed 7 Dec 2016Source: The Lancet [edited]<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)32518-1/fulltext>Shilpa Kodati, MD, Tara N Palmore, MD, Frank A Spellman, MD, Denise Cunningham, MEd, Benjamin Weistrop, BA, Dr H Nida Sen, M. Bilateral posterior uveitis associated with Zika virus infection.A week after a 26-year-old man returned from Puerto Rico, he developed 1 week of redness of both eyes without discharge, which resolved without treatment, but was followed a week later by flashes of light (photopsias) in the left eye. Ophthalmic examination showed visual acuities of 20/20 and normal anterior segment in both eyes, but 0åá5+ cells in the vitreous (graded on a scale of 0 to 4+) on dilated fundus examination and scattered faint mid-peripheral yellow-white lesions in the left eye only. The authors believe this is the 1st reported case of bilateral posterior uveitis and acquired chorioretinal lesions associated with Zika virus disease. The presence of chorioretinal lesions in the left eye and several foci of leakage on ICG angiography bilaterally are suggestive of lesions at different stages of activity.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Although ocular damage in Zika virus infected fetuses and neonates has been described previously, this report provides evidence of yet another type of lesion, in this case in the eyes of an adult man. This report indicates the importance of travel histories when rare cases such as this one present with uveitis. - Mod.TY]******[7] Mosquito controlDate: Wed 7 Dec 2016Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005176>Maha Bouzid, Julii Brainard, Lee Hooper, Paul R. Hunter. Public Health Interventions for _Aedes_ Control in the Time of Zikavirus- A Meta-Review on Effectiveness of Vector Control Strategies.AbstractBackgroundThere is renewed interest in effective measures to control Zika and dengue vectors. A synthesis of published literature with a focus on the quality of evidence is warranted to determine the effectiveness of vector control strategies.MethodologyWe conducted a meta-review assessing the effectiveness of any _Aedes_ control measure. We searched Scopus and Medline for relevant reviews through to May 2016. Titles, abstracts and full texts were assessed independently for inclusion by 2 authors. Data extraction was performed in duplicate and validity of the evidence was assessed using GRADE criteria.Findings13 systematic reviews that investigated the effect of control measures on entomological parameters or disease incidence were included. Biological controls seem to achieve better reduction of entomological indices than chemical controls, while educational campaigns can reduce breeding habitats. Integrated vector control strategies may not always increase effectiveness. The efficacy of any control program is dependent on local settings, intervention type, resources and study duration, which may partly explain the varying degree of success between studies. Nevertheless, the quality of evidence was mostly low to very low due to poor reporting of study design, observational methodologies, heterogeneity, and indirect outcomes, thus hindering an evidence-based recommendation.ConclusionsThe evidence for the effectiveness of _Aedes_ control measures is mixed. Chemical control, which is commonly used, does not appear to be associated with sustainable reductions of mosquito populations over time. Indeed, by contributing to a false sense of security, chemical control may reduce the effectiveness of educational interventions aimed at encouraging local people to remove mosquito breeding sites. Better quality studies of the impact of vector control interventions on the incidence of human infections with Dengue or Zika are still needed.Author SummaryVarious strategies for the control of mosquito-borne diseases exist and have been used for decades. The effectiveness of these control measures has been evaluated in several systematic reviews, however, their conclusions were contradicting. The current Zika outbreak in the Americas renewed the global health community's interest in the control of _Aedes_ transmitted diseases (dengue, yellow fever and chikungunya). We sought to provide an up to date systematic review about the effectiveness of chemical, biological, educational and integrated vector control strategies. In addition, we looked at recent primary studies that were not included in any systematic review as well as novel tools for mosquito control. This meta-review provides a comprehensive list of systematic reviews on the effect of vector control interventions on entomological parameters (most often indicators of vector density) or disease incidence. Biological control was found to achieve higher reduction of mosquito populations than chemical control. Educational campaigns are essential to reduce breeding sites and interrupt disease transmission. Integrated vector control strategies may not always increase effectiveness. The quality of the evidence was low to very low for most interventions. The effectiveness of any control strategy is setting- dependent.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[In the face of an outbreak of cases of Zika virus infections or of cases of other _Aedes aegypti_ transmitted viruses, such as dengue or chikungunya, there is often a public demand that the government ""do something."" Often, that means very visible truck-mounted fogging machines circulating in the streets. That may take the pressure off the officials but, as the above authors note, provides only short-term mosquito reduction at best, and other beneficial insects are likely to be killed as well. As the above study indicates, other non-chemical vector control approaches are needed. It will be interesting to see, going forward, if some of the current biological approaches such as genetically modified male mosquitoes or introduction of _Wolbachia_ bacteria into vector mosquito populations will reduce virus transmission. Interestingly, a study in India published on line on 5 Dec 2016 in PLoS One (<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0166768>) that looked at _Aedes aegypti_ populations found that interventions made in December through May resulted in significantly fewer dengue cases in June through November. - Mod.TY]******[7] Convalescent serum protectsDate: Tue 6 Dec 2016Source: Cell Research doi: 10.1038/cr.2016.144 [edited]<http://www.nature.com/cr/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/cr2016144a.html>Shuo Wang, Shuai Hong, Yong-Qiang Deng, Qing Ye, Ling-Zhai Zhao, Fu-Chun Zhang, Cheng-Feng Qin, Zhiheng Xu. Transfer of convalescent serum to pregnant mice prevents Zika virus infection and microcephaly in offspring.Injection of approximately 650 PFU ZIKV into the cerebroventricular space of embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) [mouse] brains has been shown to result in microcephaly at E18.5. We adopted the same method to investigate the potential protective effect of convalescent serum during pregnancy. 100 ul convalescent serum was injected into the peritoneal cavity of pregnant ICR mice once daily on day 1 and 2 after the brains of embryos were infected with ZIKV. Fetal brains were inspected at E18.5 by immunocytochemistry staining. Similar to what was shown previously, a large number of cells in the cortex were infected in the brains injected with ZIKV, and the number of infected cells in the fetal brains from serum-treated pregnant mice decreased substantially. Accordingly, the number of cells positive for activated form of caspase-3 also reduced dramatically. These findings indicate that convalescent serum can inhibit ZIKV infection and suppress cell death in infected brains, which have been shown previously to contribute to the smaller brain sizes.We next investigated whether convalescent serum can prevent microcephaly induced by ZIKV infection. Compared with their mock-infected littermates, a mild reduction in brain sizes was observed in ZIKV-infected fetuses 5 days after infection (data not shown), and the administration of convalescent serum to the pregnant mother reversed such reduction.Our results demonstrate that passive transfer of convalescent serum containing high-titer neutralizing antibodies to pregnant mice can not only suppress ZIKV replication but also inhibit cell death and reduction of neural progenitor cells in infected fetal brains, thus preventing microcephaly. Our results indicate that antibodies in the convalescent serum can pass through both the placental barrier of pregnant mice and the blood-brain barrier of fetuses. Our study reveals the potential of convalescent serum for the prevention and treatment of ZIKV infection in pregnant women, which is particularly important in countries and regions where abortion is prohibited by law or religion. A panel of human monoclonal antibodies with potent neutralizing activities have now been characterized, and our results highlight their potential application in pregnant women in the endemic regions.--Communicated by:Roland HÌ bnerSuperior Health CouncilBrusselsBelgium<roland.hubner@sante.belgique.be>[The approach used in the above studies may provide a useful model for the study of Zika virus pathogenesis in fetuses. It remains to be seen how applicable the mouse model is for prevention of teratogenic effects in the fetuses of pregnant women. A major challenge is that about 80 percent of people who are infected by Zika virus are asymptomatic or very mildly affected. A small proportion of those asymptomatic women do not know that their fetuses are affected until late in their pregnancies -- 21 or more weeks of gestation -- when the fetal damage has already happened. - Mod.TY]******[8] Zika vaccine trial, monkeysDate: Fri 2 Dec 2016Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]<http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0005168>Matthew T. Aliota, Dawn M. Dudley, Christina M. Newman, Emma L. Mohr et al. Heterologous Protection againstAsian Zika Virus Challenge in Rhesus Macaques.Author SummaryZika virus (ZIKV) isolates are genetically diverse, but belong to 2 recognized lineages, termed ""African"" and ""Asian."" Asian ZIKV infection during pregnancy causes fetal abnormalities including microcephaly. Developing an effective preventative Zika virus vaccine that protects pregnant women is essential for minimizing fetal abnormalities; at least 18 groups are developing ZIKV vaccines. The genetic and antigenic variability of many RNA viruses limits the effectiveness of vaccines, and the degree to which immunity against one ZIKV strain could provide protection against another is unknown. Here we show that rhesus macaques infected with the East African ZIKV strain MR766 are completely protected from subsequent infection with heterologous Asian ZIKV. MR766 is more genetically divergent from all known Asian ZIKV strains than Asian ZIKV strains are from one another. Therefore, ZIKV strain selection is unlikely to compromise vaccine effectiveness.--Communicated by: ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[It is encouraging to see that Zika virus vaccines are moving along swiftly and now are entering into non-human primate trials. The vaccine reported on above is promising, but several additional steps are needed, including phase 1-3 clinical trials in humans before approval for general human use can be granted. - Mod.TY]
