The Robesonian, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]<https://robesonian.com/news/94311/gas-leak-sickens-30-at-restaurant>More than 2 dozen people were treated by paramedics after showing symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning at the River Ridge Tap House restaurant in Clemmons [North Carolina].Forsyth County EMS [emergency services] tells local media that about 30 people who visited the restaurant Saturday night [8 Dec 2016] experienced headaches, nausea, and vomiting. 14 people were taken to the hospital, and the rest were treated and released from the scene.Lewisville Fire Department Assistant Chief Steve Williams says the gas started leaking because of a malfunction in the restaurant's heating system.Williams says an off-duty firefighter who happened to be at the restaurant noticed that people were becoming ill, so he called the fire department.Fire officials at the scene confirmed the level of carbon monoxide was 6 times the normal amount.SM and some friends were in the restaurant. ""What is happening to me? Did I get infected by that much? What's going to happen,"" [she] told WFMY-TV. ""It was not fun. ""I'm just glad it's over and we are all standing here. Physically standing here,"" said SM. ""That's good.Jenna Edwards with the River Ridge Taproom says they called their heating technician and the problem was fixed that night.""We deeply regret what happened. I feel sorry for everybody that was back here,"" said Edwards. ""My biggest concern was for the children that were back here.""Firefighters say the gas is no longer leaking and there is no threat to the restaurant.Carbon monoxide is an odorless gas so none who worked at the restaurant knew what was happening.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[What is carbon monoxide?Carbon monoxide, or CO, is an odorless, colorless gas that can kill you.Where is CO found?CO is found in fumes produced any time you burn fuel in cars or trucks, small engines, stoves, lanterns, grills, fireplaces, gas ranges, or furnaces. CO can build up indoors and poison people and animals who breathe it.What are the symptoms of CO poisoning?The most common symptoms of CO poisoning are headache, dizziness, weakness, upset stomach, vomiting, chest pain, and confusion. CO symptoms are often described as ""flu-like."" If you breathe in a lot of CO it can make you pass out or kill you. People who are sleeping or drunk can die from CO poisoning before they have symptoms.Who is at risk from CO poisoning?Everyone is at risk for CO poisoning. Infants, the elderly, people with chronic heart disease, anemia, or breathing problems are more likely to get sick from CO. Each year, more than 400 Americans die from unintentional CO poisoning not linked to fires, more than 20 000 visit the emergency room, and more than 4000 are hospitalized.Have your heating system serviced annuallyHow can I prevent CO poisoning in my home?- Install a battery-operated or battery back-up CO detector in your home and check or replace the battery when you change the time on your clocks each spring and fall. Place your detector where it will wake you up if it alarms, such as outside your bedroom. Consider buying a detector with a digital readout. This detector can tell you the highest level of CO concentration in your home in addition to alarming. Replace your CO detector every 5 years;- have your heating system, water heater, and any other gas, oil, or coal burning appliances serviced by a qualified technician every year;- do not use portable flameless chemical heaters indoors;- if you smell an odor from your gas refrigerator have an expert service it. An odor from your gas refrigerator can mean it could be leaking CO;- when you buy gas equipment, buy only equipment carrying the seal of a national testing agency, such as Underwriters' Laboratories;- make sure your gas appliances are vented properly. Horizontal vent pipes for appliances, such as a water heater, should go up slightly as they go toward outdoors, as shown below [see graph at <https://www.cdc.gov/co/images/gasline_factsheet.jpg>]. This prevents CO from leaking if the joints or pipes aren't fitted tightly;- have your chimney checked or cleaned every year. Chimneys can be blocked by debris. This can cause CO to build up inside your home or cabin;- never patch a vent pipe with tape, gum, or something else. This kind of patch can make CO build up in your home, cabin, or camper;- never use a gas range or oven for heating. Using a gas range or oven for heating can cause a build up of CO inside your home, cabin, or camper;- never burn charcoal indoors. Burning charcoal -- red, gray, black, or white -- gives off CO;- never use a portable gas camp stove indoors. Using a gas camp stove indoors can cause CO to build up inside your home, cabin, or camper;- never use a generator inside your home, basement, or garage or less than 20 feet (6 m) from any window, door, or vent.This comment was extracted from <https://www.cdc.gov/co/faqs.htm>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/25683>.].................................................sb/tg/mj/lm"
