UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ReliefWeb, UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) report [edited]<http://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/measles-outbreak-poses-new-threat-children-somalia>Measles outbreak poses new threat to children in Somalia--------------------------------------------------------A recent outbreak of measles in Kismayo [Lower Juba, also called Jubbaland or Jubbada Hoose], Somalia has put additional strain on an already overwhelmed hospital. Learn how UNICEF is helping to fight the outbreak by getting children immunized.The cholera treatment centre at Kismayo General Hospital, the biggest hospital in Kismayo, hadn't had any patients since the last outbreak was brought under control. But lately it has again been inundated with patients.This time, the outbreak is measles -- a highly contagious viral disease that can lead to pneumonia, diarrhoea, encephalitis which causes brain swelling, and blindness. Since September [2016], 419 measles cases have been officially recorded, 302 of which are children under 5. In Somalia, measles is a major cause of death among children -- but it can be effectively prevented with a simple vaccine.Lying on mattresses on the floor are dozens of children. Most of them are sleeping with their bodies curled up -- oblivious of the heat and flies. Some have visibly swollen eyes, leaking pus from their eyes and nose. If awake, they look dazed and listless.Among them are an 8-month-old girl, and her brother, 1 year and 8 months. The girl breathes rapidly and has contracted pneumonia, a severe complication caused by measles, while the boy has a rash all over his body. The children are accompanied by their mother.""They have had a fever for 10 days, and also vomiting, coughing and congested chests,"" says the woman. ""We brought them here 2 days ago. It was only when we got here we realized that it was measles.""On a mattress across from the woman and her children is another woman and 2 of her children, aged, 3, and 4. Both children are sleeping as if exhausted. They arrived today after being ill for more than a week.""I took them to a private clinic and they thought it was malaria and gave us some medications,"" says their mother. ""Then they started having rashes and itching eyes. A neighbour told me that it could be measles, so I rushed them here.""When asked whether the children have ever been immunized, the mothers both answer ""No.""Hussein Kassim Ali, director of the hospital, is facing some big challenges these days. The hospital's maternity wing is on the verge of being closed due to a funding gap from its donors. Now to make matters worse, he's coping with the measles outbreak, and a possible seasonal increase in diarrhoea cases.He is troubled by the fact that most of these mothers have never had their children immunized even though there are 16 free vaccination posts in town.""We need to be prepared for the worst case scenario,"" says Mr Ali. ""We need mass vaccination campaigns. Communities need to be mobilized, vaccines need to be stocked up. We need help!""UNICEF is working with the Ministry of Health from the regional Jubbaland authorities and the Federal Government along with the International Red Cross, the World Health Organization and other partners on a mass vaccination campaign. Some 54 000 children aged between 9 months and 10 years old will be vaccinated against measles and receive vitamin A supplements to boost their immunity.[Byline: Kun Li]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[This vaccination campaign is critical to preventing transmission of measles, a highly contagious virus, in Somalia. Supplementing with vitamin A may improve recovery, as described in: Vitamin A Treatment of Measles. Pediatrics 1993; 91(5) by the Committee on Infectious Diseases (<http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/91/5/1014>):Several recent investigations have indicated that vitamin A treatment of children with measles in developing countries has been associated with reductions in morbidity and mortality. The World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) issued a joint statement recommending that vitamin A be administered to all children diagnosed with measles in communities where vitamin A deficiency (serum vitamin A less than 10 microg/dL) is a recognized problem and where mortality related to measles is 1 percent or higher. The recommended regimen is 100 000 IU by mouth at the time of diagnosis for infants younger than 12 months of age, and 200 000 IU for older children. In the presence of ophthalmologic signs of vitamin A deficiency, such as night blindness, Bitot's spots (grayish white deposits on the bulbar conjunctiva adjacent to the cornea) or xerophthalmia, the WHO recommends the dose be repeated in 24 hours and again 4 weeks later. Vitamin A is available in low-cost liquid formulations and is supplemented in infant formulas (2000 microg/L).Rationale for vitamin A-----------------------Vitamin A is a necessary substrate for preserving epithelial cell integrity and in addition plays a role in immune modulation.In a later study (D'Souza RM, D'Souza R: Vitamin A for treating measles in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002; (1): CD001479; <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11869601>), it was concluded that there was no clear evidence that a single dose of 200 000 IU of vitamin A per day was associated with reduced mortality among children with measles, but there was evidence that the same dose given for 2 days was associated with a reduced risk of overall mortality and pneumonia specific mortality. The effect was greater in children under the age of 2 years. There were no trials that compared a single dose with 2 doses, although the precision of the estimates of trials that used a single dose were similar to the trials that used 2 doses. - Mod.LKMaps of Somalia can be seen at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/somalia.pdf> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/28279>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
