Limerick Leader [edited]<http://www.limerickleader.ie/news/home/227734/outbreak-of-sexually-transmitted-diseaseson-ul-campus.html>The University of Limerick [UL] has confirmed that 14 cases of gonorrhoea are ""associated with the campus"", following an urgent alert about sexually transmitted diseases sent out to its student population. The Director of Student Services, Dr Bernadette Walsh, said that the Student Health Centre had been proactively screening for STIs [sexually transmitted infections] and that this may ""account for the increased levels of detection.""""According to the most up-to-date figures that we have access to, there have been 97 cases of gonorrhoea in counties Clare, Limerick and Tipperary during 2016. A total of 14 of these are associated with this campus, which consists of approximately 15 000 students. We have taken the proactive step, working closely with the HSE [Health Service Executive], of sending out a strongly-worded message to our student community alerting them to this public health issue because we take the wellbeing of our students very seriously. The health of all students is paramount. Therefore, we would advise any student who may have a concern about any element of their mental or physical health to seek appropriate medical treatment,"" she said.The HSE has said it is ""concerned"" about an increase in the incidence of gonorrhoea infection in the Mid-West [Mid-West Region comprises counties of Clare, Limerick, North Tipperary and the city of Limerick. - Mod.LL]. It said that in 2015 there were 55 cases - in 2016 there have been 98 to date. ""A particular increase has been seen in those aged less than 20 years old, with 28 cases reported this year in this age group as compared to 11 in 2015,"" it said. It also pointed to an increase in notifications of chlamydia in 2016, with 516 cases compared to 454 for the whole of 254.Earlier, an 'urgent alert' was sent to all students in UL, warning of 'an outbreak of gonorrhoea and chlamydia on campus'. The email notification, sent out at 11.07 am this Wed [14 Dec 2016] morning, said that the Student Health Centre ""has been notified that there is an outbreak of gonorrhoea and chlamydia on campus"". The centre confirmed to the Limerick Leader that the alert had been sent out and was genuine.The email warned: ""These are sexually transmitted diseases as a result of unprotected anal, vaginal or oral sex. It is possible to have these conditions without having any type of symptoms. If you have had unprotected sex or have any concerns we would strongly advise you to contact the Student Health Centre or your GP,"" it adds.The University confirmed in a statement that it was ""working closely with the HSE following the identification of an increase in the number of students presenting with gonorrhoea and/or chlamydia to the UL Student Health Centre.""As is best practice, UL has rolled out an awareness campaign contacting every student directly. In accordance with HSE protocols students are being urged to present to the STI [sexually transmitted infections] and/or the GP clinics run by the UL Student Health Centre should they have concerns with regard to any element of their health and to get the necessary treatment. All students who present are currently being seen with or without an appointment and UL will continue to work closely with the HSE to ensure all awareness and treatment protocols are fully adhered to.""[Byline: Fintan Walsh]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Recently ProMED-mail posted a news report on the rising incidence of gonorrhea and HIV infection in 2016 that has mainly affected men who have sex with men (ProMED-mail post Syphilis, gonococcal disease, HIV - Ireland: rising incidence, MSM 20161017.4564211). No mention in the news report above is made of the sex, sexual orientation, or sexual behaviors of individuals involved in the University of Limerick or the Mid-West Region outbreak. More information in this regard would be appreciated from knowledgeable sources. - Mod.MLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/39>.]
