Outbreak News Today [edited]<http://outbreaknewstoday.com/hong-kong-officials-investigate-probable-botulism-case-47862/>Hong Kong health officials report today [14 Dec 2016] that they are investigating a case of probable botulism. This has prompted them to remind the public that botulinum toxin injection should only be prescribed and performed by registered doctors.The patient, a 29-year-old woman with good past health, developed drooping eyelids, blurred vision, and generalized weakness since 12 Dec 2016.She attended the Accident and Emergency Department of Kwong Wah Hospital on 13 Dec 2016 and was found to have ptosis on admission on the same day. The clinical diagnosis was suspected iatrogenic botulism. The patient has been in stable condition and was discharged against medical advice today [14 Dec 2016].According to the patient, she attended a beauty premises alone near Yau Ma Tei and received multiple injections suspected to be of botulinum toxins over her face on 8 Nov 2016 and 6 Dec 2016 respectively. According to the patient, the injections were not given by a doctor. She could not recall the name and address of the beauty premises.Epidemiological investigations are ongoing.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Yau Ma Tei, also known as Waterloo is an area in the Yau Tsim Mong District in the south of the Kowloon Peninsula in Hong Kong.This article sounds like the lady was seeking botox (botulinum toxin) injections for facial aging and wrinkling.However to not have a trained professional doing the injections sounds quite dangerous, and indeed it proved potentially life threatening in this case.While the procedure can seem harmless enough, it is important to rest and not have this very potent drug reacting to areas other than the skin creases of age.Botulinum toxin, one of the most poisonous biological substances known, is a neurotoxin produced by the bacterium _Clostridium botulinum_. _C. botulinum_ elaborates 8 antigenically distinguishable exotoxins (A, B, C1, C2, D, E, F, and G). All serotypes interfere with neural transmission by blocking the release of acetylcholine, the principal neurotransmitter at the neuromuscular junction, causing muscle paralysis. The weakness induced by injection with botulinum toxin A usually lasts about 3 months. Botulinum toxins now play a very significant role in the management of a wide variety of medical conditions, especially strabismus and focal dystonias, hemifacial spasm, and various spastic movement disorders, headaches, hypersalivation, hyperhidrosis, and some chronic conditions that respond only partially to medical treatment. The list of possible new indications is rapidly expanding. The cosmetological applications include correction of lines, creases and wrinkling all over the face, chin, neck, and chest to dermatological applications such as hyperhidrosis. Injections with botulinum toxin are generally well tolerated and side effects are few. A precise knowledge and understanding of the functional anatomy of the mimetic muscles is absolutely necessary to correctly use botulinum toxins in clinical practice.Botulinum toxin is injected into affected muscles or glands using a 30-gauge 1-inch needle. Doses are tailored according to the mode of use and individual patients, and the dose depends on the mass of muscle being injected: the larger the muscle mass the higher the dose required. However, lower doses may be required in patients with preexisting weakness and in females.Toxin injections are given through hollow teflon coated needles directly into affected/overactive muscles. In localized muscle overactivity, especially, in delicate places such as strabismus, the injections are usually guided by electromyography.As a general precaution, one should go home immediately and rest after Botox å¨. Do nothing strenuous for one or 2 days and refrain from laser/IPL [intense pulsed light] treatments, facials, and facial massage for one to 2 weeks after injections. This is to minimize toxins dislodging and traveling (due to increased blood circulation or direct pressure) to the surrounding muscles.The weakness induced by injection with botulinum toxin A usually lasts about 3 months. Hence, further injections at regular intervals are required and the interval varies widely depending on the dose and individual susceptibility. Response after the injections should be assessed both by subjective and by objective measures. Most patients treated with botulinum toxin require repeated injections over many years. Some patients who respond well initially develop tolerance to the injections due to development of neutralizing antibodies to the toxin. Patients who receive higher individual doses or frequent booster injections seem to have a higher risk of developing antibodies. Injections should therefore be given at the lowest effective dose and as infrequently as possible. Several types of antibody assay are available. In clinical trials patients resistant to botulinum A have benefited from injections with other serotypes, including B, C, and F.Injections with botulinum toxin are generally well tolerated and side effects are few. Generalized idiosyncratic reactions are uncommon, generally mild, and transient. There can be mild injection pain and local edema, erythema, transient numbness, headache, malaise, or mild nausea. Its effect diminishes with increasing distance from the injection site, but spread to nearby muscles and other tissues is possible. The most feared adverse effect is temporary unwanted weakness/paralysis of nearby musculature caused by the action of the toxin. It usually resolves in several months and in some patients in a few weeks, depending on the site, strength of the injections, and the muscles made excessively weak. Approximately 1-3 percent of patients may experience a temporary upper lid or brow ptosis. This results from migration of the botulinum toxin to the levator palpebrae superioris muscle. Patients often are instructed to remain in an upright position for 3 to 4 hours following injection and avoid manual manipulation of the area. Active contraction of the muscles under treatment may increase the uptake of toxin and decrease its diffusion.The ptosis usually lasts 2 to 6 weeks. It can be treated with apraclonidine 0.5 percent eyedrops. This is an alpha-adrenergic agent that stimulates the MÌ ller muscle and immediately elevates the upper eyelid. This treatment usually can raise the eyelid 1-3 mm. The treatment of 1 to 2 drops 3 times per day continues until the ptosis resolves. To avoid ptosis, place injections 1 cm above the eyebrow and do not cross the midpupillary line. Apraclonidine is contraindicated in patients with documented hypersensitivity. Phenylephrine 2.5 percent can be used alternatively. Neo-Synephrine is contraindicated in patients with narrow-angle glaucoma and in patients with aneurysms.Weakness of the lower eyelid or lateral rectus can occur following injection of the lateral orbicularis oculi. If severe lower lid weakness occurs, an exposure keratitis may result and if the lateral rectus is weakened, diplopia results. Treatment is symptomatic.Patients receiving injections into the neck muscles for torticollis may therefore develop dysphagia because of diffusion of the toxin into the oropharynx. When this occurs, it usually lasts only a few days or weeks. Some patients may require soft foods. Although a swallowing weakness does not herald systemic toxicity, if it is severe, patients may be at risk of aspiration. Some patients experience neck weakness, which is especially noticeable when attempting to raise the head from a supine position. This occurs after weakening of the sternocleidomastoid muscles, either from direct injection or diffusion. This is more common in women with long thin necks. Avoid these adverse effects by using the lowest effective doses and precisely placing toxin into the platysma.Distant effects shown by specialized electromyographic tests can also occur, but weakness of distant muscles or generalized weakness, possibly due to the toxin spreading in the blood, is very rare, however, avoid intravascular injections because diffuse spread of large amounts of toxin can mimic the symptoms of botulism.Bruising can occur, particularly if a small vein is lacerated or a patient is taking aspirin, vitamin E, or NSAIDs. Ideally, patients should stop taking these products 2 weeks before the procedure. Headaches can occur after Botoxå¨ injections; however, in one study by Carruthers et al, this did not exceed the placebo group. This is thought to be due to the trauma of the injection and not something inherent in the toxin. In fact, botulinum toxin injections are extremely safe. To date, no significant long-term hazards of botulinum toxin injections have been identified in excess of placebo groups.Other systemic side effects include an influenza-like illness and, rarely, brachial plexopathy, which may be immune mediated. No severe allergic reactions have been reported, however, patients may be allergic to any of its components. Gallbladder dysfunction attributed to autonomic side effects of the toxin and a case of necrotizing fasciitis in an immunosuppressed woman with blepharospasm have been noted.Botulinum toxin is contraindicated in patients afflicted with a preexisting motor neuron disease, myasthenia gravis, Eaton-Lambert syndrome, neuropathies, psychological unstability, history of reaction to toxin or albumin, pregnancy and lactating females, and infection at the injection site. Careful monitoring should be done in children as it might alter cell functions such as axonal growth.Some medications decrease neuromuscular transmission and generally should be avoided in patients treated with botulinum toxin. These include aminoglycosides (may increase effect of botulinum toxin), penicillamine, quinine, chloroquine, and hydroxychloroquine (may reduce effect), calcium channel blockers, and blood thinning agents, such as warfarin or aspirin (may result in bruising).Some patients do not respond to injections and, having never previously responded, are designated as primary non responders. Many reasons may lead to a lack of response. Patients with rhytids [wrinkles] that are not dynamic in origin (such as, photodamage, age-related changes) do not respond. Improper injection technique or the denatured toxin may also result into therapeutic failure. Some patients may have neutralizing antibodies from prior subclinical exposure, or individual variations in docking proteins may exist. Secondary non responders respond initially but lose the response on subsequent injections. Most of these patients may have developed neutralizing antibodies.Portions of this comment were extracted fromNigam PK, Nigam A: Botulinum toxin. Indian J Dermatol. 2010; 55(1): 8-14. The complete article and references are available at <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2856357/>- Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1123>.]
