Chicago Tribune [edited]<http://www.chicagotribune.com/suburbs/daily-southtown/news/ct-sta-orland-norovirus-st-1216-20161215-story.html>Cook County Officials were trying to determine the source of a norovirus outbreak that sickened more than 60 people who attended functions at an Orland Park banquet hall in recent days.Some parties and other events that were due to take place this week at Orland Chateau, 14500 S. LaGrange Road, were postponed by event organizers, and the hall has been undergoing a thorough cleaning the past few days, Tom Koszulinski, co-owner of the facility, said Thu [15 Dec 2016].Officials aren't sure whether the virus originated at the banquet hall or perhaps introduced to the facility by someone infected by the virus, which is highly contagious, Deanna Durica, spokeswoman for the Cook County Department of Public Health, said Thu [15 Dec 2016].Norovirus hasn't definitely been pinpointed as the culprit, but the symptoms experienced by people who attended functions at the banquet hall, including a [9 Dec 2016] party, ""are consistent with norovirus,"" Durica said. Results of tests done on some of the people who went to their doctor after falling ill have not yet been fully reviewed by the health department, she said.Up to 60 people that the department contacted complained of symptoms such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhea following a [9 Dec 2016] party at the banquet hall, and health officials also spoke with 3 people who attended subsequent events at Orland Chateau and 2 food workers who also had symptoms, Durica said. More than 200 people had attended the 9 Dec event.The virus is commonly spread through contaminated food or water or by close contact with someone infected with the virus, according to the Mayo Clinic's website.""We do not know the source of the illness,"" Durica said, noting it could have been pre-existing at the banquet hall or brought in by a guest attending an event. The virus is easily transmitted by person-to-person contact, she said.Orland Chateau wasn't ordered closed, but some functions that were to take place this week were rescheduled, partly over concerns of people who had booked the parties, Koszulinski said. Some of them, he said, were worried about elderly guests who would be attending and who might be susceptible should the virus still be present. He said that events scheduled for next week are still scheduled to take place.The building has had an extensive cleaning and the hall has followed health officials' guidelines in disinfecting surfaces that could have been contaminated, Koszulinski, who owns the business with his brother, said. Still, he said he understands people might be leery about coming to the hall. ""People aren't going to feel like they're safe in here until it's done,"" he said.An Orland Park village inspector had conducted a routine health and sanitation inspection of Orland Chateau on 9 Dec, which the business passed, just hours before the event where several people later fell ill, Koszulinski and Durica said.Koszulinski said the episode has been ""nerve-racking,"" and that despite the safeguards the banquet hall has taken to eliminate any traces of the virus, ""it's still on my mind. If a person comes in (to the hall) who's infected with it, it could do the same thing,"" he said.[Byline: Mike Nolan]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Norovirus is a highly contagious virus that causes gastroenteritis, an illness that usually involves vomiting and diarrhea. It is the leading cause of illness and outbreaks from contaminated food in the United States. Most of these outbreaks occur in the food service settings like restaurants. Infected food workers are frequently the source of the outbreaks, often by touching ready-to-eat foods, such as raw fruits and vegetables, with their bare hands before serving them. However, any food served raw or handled after being cooked can get contaminated with norovirus.Norovirus is responsible for approximately 20 million illnesses each year, with 570--800 deaths reported annually. (excerpted and edited from <https://www.cdc.gov/norovirus/about/transmission.html>) - Mod.LKA map showing the location of Chicago, Illinois, United States can be found at<http://healthmap.org/promed/p/520> - CopyEd.AO]
