Pakistan Khuda Hafiz [edited]<http://www.pakistankakhudahafiz.com/news/provincial-health-dept-investigate-suspected-cases-viral-disease-chikungunya/>The provincial health department decided on Saturday [17 Dec 2016] to investigate cases of high-grade fever and acute joint pain being reported at a Malir health facility after its medical superintendent communicated to officials that some of these cases were of chikungunya, a viral disease caused by infected mosquitoes. The hospital in question is located in Khokhorapar No. 2.Progamme manager of dengue prevention and control Dr. Masood Solangi said that the medical superintendent of Al Mustafa Welfare Society hospital had informed him that his hospital had received some chikungunya cases. ""I asked him about this, since the hospital doesn't have the facilities to diagnose chikungunya,"" he explained, adding that symptoms of high-grade fever and acute joint pain might have led doctors to believe that patients had contracted chikungunya.""However, we will investigate these cases on Monday [19 Dec 2016] with the help of experts arriving from Islamabad. The disease shares some clinical signs with dengue, for instance high-grade fever, body aches and rash, and can be misdiagnosed.""The disease, Dr. Solangi pointed out, was rarely fatal, and no other health facility in the city had reported a similar complaint with the surveillance centre. ""If cases were found positive, they will be the 1st cases of chikungunya in the country,"" he added.According to him, the city immediately needs vector control strategies, especially fumigation and waste disposal measures, to prevent outbreaks of diseases like malaria, typhoid and dengue.""A decade ago, no dengue case was ever reported in winter, but now we have them. This shows that the virus has successfully adapted itself to the filthy conditions prevailing in the city. The theory that the dengue vector (a female mosquito) breeds only in clean water is no longer true, since we have found its larvae in dirty water, too.""The city, he said, hadn't seen a single fumigation drive this year [2016]. Upon contact, staff at the Al Mustafa hospital said that hundreds of patients with complaints of high-grade fever and body aches had reported at the facility since last month [November 2016].""We don't know what exactly they have since we can't afford to test each and every case in the laboratory. Most patients are advised [to take] general medicines to alleviate pain and fever,"" a doctor said on condition of anonymity.Some patients were found to have dengue, others typhoid or malaria when their diagnosis was made, he added.Currently, the facility to diagnose chikungunya in the city only exists at the Aga Khan University Hospital (AKUH), health department sources say.According to the World Health Organization's (WHO) website, chikungunya is a viral disease transmitted to humans by infected mosquitoes. It causes fever and severe joint pain.Other symptoms include muscle pain, headache, nausea, fatigue and rash. Joint pain is often debilitating and can vary in duration. There is no cure for the disease. Treatment is focused on relieving the symptoms. The proximity of mosquito breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for chikungunya.The disease occurs in Africa, Asia and the Indian subcontinent. In recent decades, mosquito vectors of chikungunya have spread to Europe and the Americas. In 2007, disease transmission was reported for the 1st time in a localised outbreak in northeastern Italy.Outbreaks have since been recorded in France and Croatia. Most patients recover fully in 2-3 weeks, but in some cases, joint pain may persist for several months, or even years.Occasional cases of eye, neurological and heart complications have been reported, as well as gastrointestinal complaints, the website says. Serious complications are not common, but in older people, the disease can contribute to the cause of death.Often, symptoms in infected individuals are mild, and the infection may go unrecognised, or be misdiagnosed in areas where dengue occurs.The name chikungunya derives from a word in the Kimakonde language, meaning ""to become contorted,"" and describes the stooped appearance of sufferers with joint pain.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Pakistan is one of the countries where dengue fever is now endemic, and chikungunya is also transmitted by the same mosquito vectors, _Aedes aegypti_, and _Aedes albopictus_. Therefore, the differential diagnosis of acute febrile viral illness may also include chikungunya as well.However, the report also states that the suspected cases are based on clinical picture and not on laboratory confirmation. A laboratory testing facility is currently available at the national public health laboratory at National Institute of Health, Islamabad.The most common symptoms of chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection are fever and joint pain. Other symptoms may include headache, muscle pain, joint swelling, or rash. Chikungunya outbreaks have been reported from neighboring countries like India and Nepal and other countries in Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Indian and Pacific Oceans. According to WHO information, Pakistan is also among countries having documented, endemic, or epidemic chikungunya disease <http://www.who.int/denguecontrol/arbo-viral/other_arboviral_chikungunya/en/>.Further epidemiological data on individual cases and their laboratory confirmation (if conducted) will be highly appreciated. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/140>.]
