Member, EpiCore Global Surveillance ProjectAccording to the Government of Bahia [Directorate of Epidemiological Surveillance, Health Secretariat of the State of Bahia 16 Dec 2016], up to now, 12 people have had symptoms such as myelitis and urine with black coloration. [The black coloration of the urine is often due to the breakdown of the muscles and release of myoglobin associated with rhabdomyolysis.- Mod.TG]The infectologist responsible for monitoring the cases suspects that these patients may come from toxic contamination of fish from the Amazon region. [Although toxins have been suspected, there has never been a toxin linked to this situation. There has been some thought that it may be an interaction of fish with some host genetic factor but that has not been proven either. - Mod.TG]According to Professor G̼bio Soares, from the Federal University of Bahia (Ufba), the samples have already been collected, but the report that should indicate what the cause of the disease will only be completed in 15 days.Experts investigate whether the consumption of the Ox Eye fish, also known as Arabaiana, is related to the disease. According to Ant̫nio Bandeira, the 11 patients who are receiving medical follow-up reported that they consumed fish meat before or during the onset of symptoms. The fish was bought fresh and prepared at home. [It has been noted previously that cooking the fish does not diminish the reaction. If it is a toxin, it is heat stable. - Mod.TG]""A family of 4, which consumes a lot of fish, said in the days before the onset of symptoms, they did not eat [fish?]. But we have at least 5 people who fed on fish in Guarajuba, which is a couple of boyfriends, the aunt, a woman who bought the food and also her maid, ""said the doctor.According to the expert, the couple's aunt even confused the symptoms with a virus. ""These 5 people who have had the symptoms have eaten the Bull's Eye, which is also known as the Arabaiana, and so this is a hypothesis, the other is that we are looking for a virus that may be causing this,There is still no certainty as to the causes of the disease, but the advice is that when patients notice the symptoms, they hydrate enough, avoid taking anti-inflammatories, and seek a doctor. The risk is that the person has dark urine, does not hydrate properly and end up having kidney failure, and that can happen.The identification of the toxin or virus that is causing the mysterious disease will depend on the clinical analysis of the patients already registered. According to Bandeira, the analysis in fish is more difficult, since it can be a toxin or chemical, which is more difficult to discover than a bacterium or virus, for example.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail <Promed@promedmail.org>[A toxin has never been found or linked, but only suspected in this condition.  There has been some thought it is a genetic interaction in some people. This has never been proven either.  There are a number of different fish that this syndrome has been linked toProMED-PORT (Portuguese) posted the following piece [machine translated] where a virology researcher has suggested that the syndrome could be viral in etiology.Date: Friday 16 Dec 2016Source: G1 [15 Dec 2016] [edited]<http://g1.globo.com/bahia/noticia/2016/12/virus-misterioso-em-salvador-causa-dor-muscular-e-deixa-urina-preta.html>Mysterious virus in Salvador causes muscle pain and leaves black urine-------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------Extreme muscle pain and black urine. These are the main symptoms of a disease that has already taken at least 9 people to the hospitals of Salvador in the last days and that, in more serious cases, can lead to renal failure. Dr. Gubbio Soares, a researcher at the virology laboratory at the Federal University of Bahia (UFBA) and a doctor of virology, says that the disease is caused by a virus that has not yet been identified.""We already know that it is a virus that causes the disease, but we have not yet determined which type"" [is it already known that the etiology is viral? What evidence has already been identified? - Mod RNA], says Dr. Gubbio, who adds already have collected samples of patients, to try to identify the virus. ""We need about 10 to 15 days to get this ID.""The specialist believes that the transmission is via oral, through the respiratory apparatus [confused ... - Mod RNA]. He points out that another symptom of the disease is the increase in the body's enzyme CPK, which acts on regulating the metabolism of contractile tissues, such as the skeletal and cardiac muscles. ""He had a patient with a CPK index of 100,000 units per liter of blood, while the normal one was 200 units per liter,"" Dr. Gubbio said. ""Because of the risk of kidney failure, patients should be hospitalized until their urine returns to normal,"" he says.The G.C. student, 24, was one of the people who had the disease in Salvador. She says her boyfriend, T.P. The same symptoms, in the same period as her. ""Last Friday (9) [December / 2016], I felt a very strong pain in the whole body."" It started at the neck, radiating, and took the whole body.I took a muscle relaxant and it did not work, then I took a second tablet And I felt a slight improvement.When I woke up on Saturday morning (10) [December / 2016], I was still in pain and went to the hospital, ""says G., who reports that the pain was unbearable. ""When you think about moving, it hurts every muscle you use to make the move you want. It's a pain I do not want for my worst enemy,"" says the student.According to G., she was admitted to the hospital on Saturday until last Wednesday (December 14, 2016) when she was discharged. The infectious doctor Ant̫nio Bandeira says that the treatment is done with hydration and analgesic. ""The patient should not under any circumstances take anti-inflammatory, because it can worsen renal function,"" he warns. The improvement time, on average, lasts three days.The doctor says that the capital of Bahia lives an outbreak of the disease. ""This is an outbreak,"" said Dr. Ant̫nio Bandeira. ""It is an outbreak.According to him, of the 9 confirmed patients, three had black urine and, of these, one patient had progressed to renal failure. ""Despite the condition, the insufficiency was temporary and it improved,"" says the doctor.Through a note, the Directorate of Epidemiological Surveillance (Divep) of the State Department of Health (Sesab) reported that it has already been notified about the disease [which disease? It has been notified about outbreak - Mod. RNA] and that it is investigating the cases.-Communicated by: ProMED-PORTProMED continues to await results of testing and more epidemiological information as the situation unfolds - Mod.TG]
