The Times of India (TOI), Times News Network (TNN) [edited]<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/pune/Vaccination-drive-to-check-monkey-fever/articleshow/56041777.cms>The state government is all set to begin immunisation drive against Kyasanur forest disease [KFD] or monkey fever in the badly affected Sindhudurg district in the next few days.The state has procured 7500 injectable doses to vaccinate high-risk individuals, including farmers and forest workers, to prevent the tick-borne viral infection from spreading to other parts of the state.The state had reported the 1st case of the fever in Sindhudurg district in the last week of January this year [2016]. Since then, the virus has infected 133 people and claimed 7 lives, all from Dodamarg taluka in Sindhudurg district. The outbreak, reported 1st in Maharashtra, has got the public health machinery on its toes.""We are going to vaccinate high-risk group people living in villages surrounded by forest in the next few days. Procurement of the vaccine is almost complete. Currently, our medical officers and paramedics are being trained in the administration of the vaccine,"" said Kanchan Jagtap, joint director (vector-borne diseases), state health department.The Viral diagnostic lab in Shimoga, Karnataka, has provided the vaccines to the state. ""Every high-risk individual needs to take 3 doses of the vaccine in a specific time frame for adequate protection against KFD,"" Jagtap said. The vaccine schedule stipulates a 2nd dose, 1 month after the 1st dose and a booster dose after 6 months. This is followed by a yearly dose for 5 years for better protection.The viral infection, which starts with high fever and body ache, produces a haemorrhage in the body, similar to that in dengue fever. It has a mortality rate of 5 to 10 percent.The spread of the virus beyond its identified endemic pockets in Karnataka has direct relevance to public health in the country. ""It calls for a surveillance programme to monitor the disease. Strengthening of the vaccination policy is necessary,"" Devendra Mourya, director, NIV, said in an interview earlier. However, controlling ticks in forest areas is tough. ""We are educating villagers about warding off tick bites. We have told them to take a hot water bath whenever they return from outside and have also told them to clean their animals when they are back from grazing. Besides, we are sensitizing people to wear clothes that cover them fully,"" said a state health official deployed in Sindhudurg district.""Suspected patients are being given supportive and symptomatic treatment at the primary health centre at Talkat,"" said another official.The Indian Council of Medical Research has sounded an alert and surveillance has been stepped up in states that share a boundary with Karnataka, including Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala.[Byline: Umesh Isalkar]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Kyasanur Forest disease (KFD) is a tick-borne viral disease transmitted from monkeys to humans through tick bites. High fever, joint pain, bleeding from the nose and gums are among the symptoms of the disease. A number of KFD cases are reported from Karnataka state every year. _Haemaphysalis spinigera_ ticks are the reservoir of KFD virus and once infected remain infected for life. Rodents, shrews, and monkeys are common hosts for the KFDV after being bitten by an infected tick (<http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/kyasanur/>).Though the vaccine is effective for KFD and is used in endemic areas of India, additional preventative measures, including insect repellents and wearing protective clothing in areas where ticks are endemic, should also be undertaken for effective control of the disease. - Mod.UBAA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/310>.]
