EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited]Another 7 cases of the unknown disease that causes strong muscular pain and dark urine were notified to the Municipal Health Department (SMS), in addition to the 11 already known since last week, totaling 18 cases. The balance was released on [Sat 17 Dec 2016], after data collection in hospitals and Emergency Care Units (UPAs). 16 of the cases were registered in Salvador, but cases were also reported in Valen̤a, in Baixo Sul Baiano.Symptoms include sudden muscle pain with no apparent cause, and changes in the levels of CPK [creatine phosphokinase], the intracellular enzyme of contracting tissues, such as muscles.An investigation roadmap that will begin to be applied this [Mon 19 Dec 2016] is being prepared by SMS, Osvaldo Cruz Foundation, and by the infectious physician Ant̫nio Bandeira, who treated part of the occurrences of the outbreak.One of the suspicions is that the symptoms are related to the consumption of the bull's eye fish -- part of the patients reported to have eaten the fish, also known as Arabaiana.After being reported that a family that showed signs of disease after they were fed with [bull's eye fish], in Guarajuba, on the north coast of the state, fishermen of the locality denounced that the sellers of the products pack the merchandise in water and formaldehyde. Cases have been reported, for the time being, as ""acute myalgia with the outbreak to be clarified.""This [Fri 16 Dec 2016], the State Health Department has issued an epidemiological alert that guides a treatment for a possible hypothesis that the episodes are from Bornholm Disease.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[The situation seems to fit Haff disease but information on Bornholm disease is included as a possible differential. However, it should be noted that Bornholm disease is not associated with consumption of fish, while Haff disease is associated with it. Thus far, the affected people report having eaten fish.Bornholm disease is an uncommon viral infection of the intercostal muscles, which join the ribs together. The lining of the lungs is also sometimes affected. The condition is sometimes known as pleurodynia, or epidemic pleurodynia.SymptomsThe main symptom of Bornholm disease is severe stabbing chest pain, which is often made worse by deep breathing, coughing, or sudden movements. The pain tends to come and go, with episodes lasting 15 to 30 minutes.Bornholm disease sometimes also causes abdominal pain, fever, headache, a sore throat, and muscle pain. These symptoms usually start suddenly and persist for several days before going away without the need for treatment. They may return, however.How the infection is spreadBornholm disease is caused by a group of viruses called enteroviruses, mainly the Coxsackie B virus.It spreads by the faecal-oral route, where traces of contaminated faeces reach the mouth. Less commonly, it can be spread through respiratory droplets in much the same way as the common cold.The viruses are found in faeces and the millions of tiny droplets that come out of the nose and mouth when someone with the condition coughs or sneezes.Hands, water, or food can become contaminated by the virus. Respiratory droplets can also hang suspended in the air before falling to contaminate surfaces. Anyone who touches these surfaces can spread the virus by touching something else.A person usually becomes infected by picking up the virus on their hands from contaminated objects, such as a toilet of unclean counter top, and then placing their hands in their mouth.Other ways the virus can be spread include drinking contaminated water and breathing in contaminated droplets from the air.This is why it's very important to wash your hands properly and avoid sharing utensils if you've been infected with the virus or if someone close to you has Bornholm diseasePortions of this comment were extracted from <http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/bornholm-disease/Pages/Introduction.aspx>. - Mod.TGA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/1674>.]
