Navajo Nation Hantavirus Surveillance Report [edited]<http://www.nec.navajo-nsn.gov/Portals/0/Reports/Navajo%20Hantavirus%20Surveillance%20Report%20October%202016.pdf>Excerpts--------PurposeThe purpose of the report was to assess the burden of hantavirus [infections] among Navajo residing in the 4 Corners area (the region of the southwestern United States formed by the juncture of Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Utah). Though hantavirus [causes] is a rare disease that occurs throughout the United States, the highest number of cases have occurred in New Mexico, Arizona, and Colorado. Hantavirus disproportionately affects Native American communities who make up 1.7 percent of the US population but, as of January 2016, account for 18 percent of hantavirus cases. The goal of the project was to quantify available data in order to serve as a platform for future surveillance efforts and to reveal patterns that may assist in targeting prevention.Report highlights-----------------Between November 1992 and May 2016, 108 cases occurred that were potentially Navajo. The highest numbers of cases occurred during the late spring and early summer months -- April, May, June, and July -- with a slight peak again in November. The overall case fatality rate was 44 percent. This is higher than the case fatality rate among the total US. population of 36 percent, though this could be a result of the relatively small sample size or the fact that this national estimate does not include 1992 or 2016.Cases were divided almost evenly between men and women, 48.2 percent and 51.9 percent respectively. HPS [hantavirus pulmonary syndrome] affected a wide range of ages from 9 years old to 75. The average age at symptom onset was 35, and the highest number of cases occurred in the 10-19, 20-29, and 30-39 age groups. Women appear to experience a higher rate of mortality (OR [odds ratio] =1.87 95 percent CI [confidence interval] 0.86, 4.03), though this could again be an artifact of the small sample size.The odds of death among women infected with hantaviruses was 1.87 times the odds of death among men infected with hantaviruses (95 percent CI 0.86, 4.03). The confidence interval suggests the data is more compatible with an odds ratio greater than 1. However, given the small sample size, it is difficult to make an inference about increased risk.Mortality among women in the 40-49, 50-59, and 60-69 age groups is especially high. 4 households experienced more than 1 case. There were 3 parent-child pairs and 1 spousal pair.Navajo Nation contains 5 geopolitical regions called agencies. Though every agency experienced hantavirus cases, almost half occurred in Eastern Agency. Given that Eastern Agency lies within New Mexico, this is consistent with the fact that New Mexico reported the highest number of cases compared to other states.Of the 56 cases for whom detailed exposure information was available, 69.8 percent were recorded as having exposure to mice at home, 5.7 percent were recorded as having work-related mouse exposure, 15.1 percent were recorded as having both work-related and homesite exposure, and 9.4 percent were recorded as both homesite and recreational exposure. 53.1 percent of the 56 individuals resided in mobile homes. 35.7 percent of homesites had floors primarily covered with carpet. 47.9 percent lived in areas characterized by pi̱on/juniper woodland, and 65.9 percent lived between 6000 and 7000 feet [1829-2134 m] of elevation.Of the 55 cases for whom medical information was available, 70.9 percent were seen at a health care facility 2 to 3 times over the course of their illness. One case visited a health care facility 5 separate times. A total of 14 cases were listed as having received extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) treatment. Due to potentially serious side effects, ECMO treatment is usually reserved for patients who are not expected to survive. Survival for cases placed on ECMO was 50 percent. It is important to note that these are cases for whom ECMO treatment was recorded, and it is possible that others received ECMO but were not listed as such in the available records.Data included-------------The NEC [Navajo Epidemiology Center] received data from the CDC Viral Special Pathogens Branch for 139 HPS cases between November 1992 and May 2016 that were linked to a city of residence or city of exposure in one of 10 counties in and around Navajo Nation. These counties are Apache (AZ), Coconino (AZ), Navajo (AZ), McKinley (NM), Cibola (NM), Sandoval (NM), San Juan (NM), La Plata (NM), Montezuma (CO), and San Juan (UT); 4 cases missing from CDC data were included from Arizona's state surveillance records. One additional case for which an environmental homesite assessment had been conducted, but was missing in other databases, was also included.2 methods were used to restrict analysis to Navajo cases. First, data were included for all individuals listed as American Indian with a community of residence on the Navajo Nation. Based on the Navajo Population Profile Report (2013), it can be assumed that approximately 90 percent of these individuals identify as Navajo. A review of narrative reports available for half of the cases suggests that the percentage may be higher in this situation. Cases with a community of residence outside Navajo Nation were evaluated individually. 3 of these cases were not included for further use because they were residents of other tribal nations. The remaining seven had potential to be Navajo cases and were included in analysis. Data was managed in Microsoft Excel 2013 and analyzed using SAS 9.3. Conclusions-----------This report provides a brief summary of 108 potentially Navajo HPS cases between November 1992 and May 2016. Women appear to have a higher risk of mortality compared to men. This difference is largest among women in the 40-49, 50-59, and 60-69 age groups. Approximately half of cases occurred in Eastern Agency. Most cases had exposure to mice in or around the home. Many cases lived in mobile homes, at altitudes between 6000 and 7000 feet [1829 - 2134 m], and in pi̱on/juniper woodland and/or high desert areas.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Cases of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome were first described in 1993, in young adults in the 4 Corners area. Subsequently, the 4 Corners area has been a hot spot for hantavirus infections for many years. The specific hantavirus involved in the report above is not stated. Almost certainly it is Sin Nombre virus. Sin Nombre hantavirus is endemic in the western USA, including the 4 Corners area. The spring and summer seasons often bring sporadic cases of hantavirus infections, as cabins and other buildings unused over the winter are opened up and cleaned in the western USA. These mice also move into dwellings with the onset of cold weather. Deer mice, _Peromyscus maniculatus_, are the reservoir hosts of the virus and shed it in feces, urine and saliva. Sin Nombre virus infections can be serious, with a relatively high case fatality rate associated with hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome. Prompt medical attention is essential.An image of the deer mouse, _P. maniculatus_, can be seen at <http://www.nsf.gov/news/mmg/media/images/mouse_f.jpg>.Maps showing the location where the states of Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona meet as the 4 Corners in the USA can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/57242>. - Mod.TY]
