Ozarks First [edited]<http://www.ozarksfirst.com/ news/mizzou-dogs-have-3-times- more-bpa-after-eating-canned- food/622971741>A study conducted at the University of Missouri found your dog's health - and your own - may be at risk if your dog eats canned food. According to a university news release, an increase in Bisphenol A - an endocrine-disrupting industrial chemical found in the linings of some metal food cans - was found after a short-term feeding study with canned dog food.Because of shared environments, the dog's unhealthy BPA exposure from canned foods could have human health hazards.""We wanted to determine if short-term feeding of widely available commercial canned food could alter BPA concentrations in dogs. Thus, we assessed BPA contained within pet food cans. We also analyzed whether disturbances in bacteria found in the gut and metabolic changes could be associated with exposure to BPA from the canned food,"" said Cheryl Rosenfeld, an associate professor of biomedical sciences in the MU College of Veterinary Medicine and an investigator in the Bond Life Sciences Center.Healthy dogs were volunteered by their owners for the study. Blood and fecal samples were collected prior to the 2-week process where dogs were fed 2 common types of commercial canned food, 1 which was assumed to be BPA-free.Professors of veterinary medicine at the university as well as other researchers analyzed the cans and food within the cans for BPA levels and then performed gut microbiome assessments.The release explained that prior to the canned food diet, the dogs were said to have minimal amounts of BPA within their systems. But after the 2-week diet, their BPA levels increased ""nearly 3-fold"". It also showed that the increase in BPA levels may have caused changes in the gut's bacteria, decreasing a certain bacterium which has the ability to metabolize BPA and similar chemicals.""We share our homes with our dogs,"" Rosenfeld said. ""Thus, these findings could have implications and relevance to humans. Indeed, our canine companions may be the best bio-sentinels for human health concerns.""Overall, the study confirmed that man's best friend may not only be one at risk from the negative effects of industrial chemicals. --Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[There has been some criticism of the original study. <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969716326274> regarding broad conclusions based upon what has been perceived to be insufficient number of animals and poor controls. Additionally, criticism has been directed at the alterations of the microbiome, especially since both diets were found to have BPA, although 1 was touted to be BPA-free.While the study may have some defects, it also highlights that manufacturers who claim to be BPA-free may not be doing a good job of testing the product, especially after it has remained in the can for a lengthy period of time.It may also highlight issues pet owners should be aware of regarding their animals. Clearly, even as the study has its faults and shortcomings, it seems it underscores that BPA can cause changes in our animals, as it can in ourselves. Furthermore, it should make us ask what our own canned food is doing to our own bodies.Portions of this comment were provided in part by Mod JH. - Mod.TG][While the study shows BPA is present even in canned food labeled as BPA-free, the study design cannot differentiate microbiome changes due to the two different brands of food utilized versus those due to BPA, as microbiome changes can be the result of many factors, including changes in diet. - Mod. JHA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106>.].................................................sb/tg/ao/jh/mpp/jh"
