Emerging Infectious Diseases [edited]<https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/23/1/15-0947_article>Epidemiology of Human Anthrax in China, 1955-2014--------------------------------Li Y, Yin W, Hugh-Jones M, Wang L, Mu D, Ren X, et al. Epidemiology of Human Anthrax in China, 1955-2014. Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(1):14-21.<https://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2301.150947>Abstract-----Using national surveillance data for 120 111 human anthrax cases recorded during 1955-2014, we analyzed the temporal, seasonal, geographic, and demographic distribution of this disease in China. After 1978, incidence decreased until 2013, when it reached a low of 0.014 cases/100 000 population. The case-fatality rate, cumulatively 3.6% during the study period, has also decreased since 1990. Cases occurred throughout the year, peaking in August. Geographic distribution decreased overall from west to east, but the cumulative number of affected counties increased during 2005-2014. The disease has shifted from industrial to agricultural workers; 86.7% of cases occurred in farmers and herdsmen. Most (97.7%) reported cases were the cutaneous form. Although progress has been made in reducing incidence, this study highlights areas that need improvement. Adequate laboratory diagnosis is lacking; only 7.6% of cases received laboratory confirmation. Geographic expansion of the disease indicates that livestock control programs will be essential in eradicating anthrax.Discussion-------------However, the present pattern of human cases clearly shows that any further improvement can be achieved only by using a proactive approach to the disease in livestock. This approach includes annual vaccination where outbreaks persist; improved laboratory diagnosis and participation, especially by veterinary diagnostic laboratories; genomic strain identification and mapping; and investigation of anomalous outbreaks (e.g., anthrax is normally a summer disease, and outbreaks at other times are more characteristic of contaminated livestock feed). The reason for the decrease in the case-fatality rate for anthrax before 1980 was that this disease was largely industry related and was relatively easy to detect. With improvements in medical care, the incidence of anthrax showed a general downward trend, but our study showed that, since the 1980s, agricultural anthrax in rural areas has become a serious problem. Because of lack of convenient access to healthcare facilities and awareness of the need to seek early treatment for rural residence, the reported case-fatality rate increased and exceeded the rate during 1950s soon after the People's Republic of China was established. However, one cannot presume that rural anthrax was absent during the earlier period. It is more likely that this disease was not reported, although cases were probably occurring at a level similar to that during the later period of reporting. In 1989, the case-fatality rate reached a high of 13.0%, which was probably caused by a major outbreak of intestinal anthrax in the Changdu District of Tibet (11).From 1990 onward, a strengthened surveillance program was initiated in western China, and early detection of anthrax facilitated early treatment. This program contributed to a decrease in the case-fatality rate. This rate has decreased to less than 1% in recent years, which is consistent with the report that the case-fatality rate for cutaneous anthrax is now less than 1% after treatment (12). However, gastrointestinal anthrax has a higher risk for death, which can occur quickly, and this finding would preempt any clinical observations or sampling. These findings might explain the unusually high number of cutaneous cases relative to each gastrointestinal case.Anthrax has not been eradicated from previously disease-endemic areas in China, and geographic distribution of the disease tends to expand into new areas. Each year, previously affected counties still accounted for a predominant proportion of counties with reports of cases that year. This finding could be caused by strong resistance of _B. anthracis_ spores to environmental conditions and persistence of spores in old foci for disease (13). However, some provinces, such as Henan, which reported many anthrax cases in the past, has not reported any anthrax cases for over 10 years, shows that it is possible to control anthrax.Conversely, newly affected counties were reported every year during the study. Newly affected counties were generally adjacent to previously affected counties, which indicated a higher risk for importing anthrax from neighboring disease-endemic counties through contaminated livestock feed or movement of animals with latent infections. However, a few counties in Hunan and Jiangsu Provinces in eastern China, which are not near disease-endemic areas, also became newly affected in recent years. Investigations of these incidents showed that they were caused by long-distance transportation of infected livestock from disease-endemic areas. These investigations indicated the need for livestock inspection and ensuring that such livestock have been vaccinated more than 7-10 days before shipment.As disease control improves, disease reporting also improves, and cases that would have been missed are now detected and reported. However, absence of disease reports is not the same as absence of disease. This situation indicates that provinces and large cities that have not had any anthrax cases in recent years are at risk for reemergence of anthrax. Humans get infected from animals with anthrax, and not vice versa. Therefore, humans will only be safe from this disease when it has been eradicated from livestock. Although eradication will require diligent surveillance and monitoring by the agricultural and veterinary communities, it has been achieved in many countries (5).Our study had 2 limitations. 1st, we used data obtained through a passive surveillance system that was based on human health facilities nationwide. Thus, disease burden was probably underestimated because of various reasons, such as not seeking medical care. However, the clinical presentation for cutaneous anthrax makes patients more likely to seek medical care. Second, probable cases without laboratory confirmation of infection are also included in the analysis. Most cases were cutaneous, and their clinical manifestations are easily identified by medical personnel.Laboratory diagnosis (based on isolation of _B. anthracis_) is not completely reliable. However, _B. anthracis_ is susceptible to many antimicrobial drugs, and treatment of this type is commonly used. Such treatment could result in lesions being negative for _B. anthracis_. Although in recent years ELISA and PCR could be used for diagnosing confirmed cases, both techniques were rarely used at the local level because there were no reliable [cheap] commercial kits for detecting antibodies against _B. anthracis_ and no unified standard procedure for PCR of _B. anthracis_ is currently available.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[This report covers a longer period than the previous paper [Anthrax - China: review, 2005-2013 20160422.4177597] but with many of the same conclusions. Effective control of anthrax, whether in humans or livestock, starts with accurate and rapid diagnosis followed up by livestock vaccination. But as humans do not maintain this pathogen, effective control and eradication depends 100% on eradicating it from livestock and controling it when it occurs in wildlife, if one can. Proactive vaccination of livestock at risk is very cost effective. - Mod.MHJA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/155>.]
