Reuters [edited]<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-yellowfever-idUSKBN14C0Q2>Angola declared the end of the world's worst yellow fever epidemic in a generation on Friday [23 Dec 2016] after a U.N.-backed vaccination campaign of 25 million people that resulted in no new cases in 6 months.The outbreak began a year ago [2015] in a slum in the capital, Luanda, before spreading throughout Angola, a war-scarred southeast African nation, and into neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo. In all, more than 400 people died.More than 15 million Angolans and 10 million Congolese were vaccinated under a campaign coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO).In a statement entitled ""The end of the epidemic of Yellow Fever in Angola"", the health ministry in Luanda said the vaccination campaign had stopped the spread of the disease.The WHO said in September [2016] the epidemic was under control but that it was too early to say it had been completely stamped out, with up to 6000 suspected cases of the mosquito-borne disease.The vaccination campaigns depleted the global stockpile of 6 million doses twice this year, forcing doctors to switch to administering 1/5 of the normal dose, a tactic that the WHO says gives at least temporary protection.The risk of such outbreaks globally has risen in recent years due to urbanization and the increasing mobility of the population. It was particularly acute this year because of the El Ni̱o weather phenomenon which multiplied mosquito numbers.[Reporting by Herculano Coroado; writing by Joe Brock; editing by Ed Cropley and Louise Ireland]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[It is good news indeed to learn that the yellow fever (YF) outbreak has come to an end in Angola. The struggle to contain YF there has illustrated several important points:- Active surveillance with laboratory support is essential to find new cases and respond in a timely way.- Avoidance of international spread should require that individuals who travel into endemic YF areas like Angola should show proof of YF vaccination before being allowed to enter these areas. The 11 cases that were infected in Angola and traveled back to China, the 1st documented YF cases in Asia, sounded the alarm. Fortunately, they returned to China at a time when YF vector mosquitoes were not active. Had they returned to southern China during the warm season when _Aedes aegypti_ transmits dengue virus, the results could have been serious and potentially resulted in YF spread across southeast Asia for the 1st time.- Stocks of YF vaccine were exhausted during the early phases of the outbreak, raising the question of what size the reserve should be. The fallback practice applied in the DR Congo was the application of 1/5 of the usual dose, dose-sparing, in order to cover the population at risk.- Good training of large numbers of vaccination teams makes it possible to vaccinate large numbers of people at risk, as illustrated by the DR Congo Kinshasa effort that covered millions of individuals in just 10 days.Many lessons were learned during the outbreak at international, national and local levels. One hopes that institutional memory of the lessons learned will persist into the future. YF virus has not gone away in Angola nor in the DR Congo. It persists in the sylvan (forest) cycle with the ongoing risk of spillover into the rural or urban human populations. The challenge is maintaining preparedness despite long absences of human cases.A map showing the location of the DR Congo and Angola can be accessed at <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/165>. - Mod.TY]
