Barf Blog [edited]<http://barfblog.com/2016/12/golden-ponds-to-reopen-after-bad-gravy-sickens-260/>Golden Ponds Restaurant in suburban Rochester, New York, has been cleared by the health department to reopen, after 260 people were sickened after eating Thanksgiving dinner [24 Nov 2016]. The restaurant will most likely be open for business starting next [Tue 27 Dec 2016], according to the owner. The Monroe County Department of Health shut the restaurant down the day after Thanksgiving, after 60 people initially reported illnesses following eating food from Golden Ponds.According to the health department, lab results point to an outbreak of foodborne illness caused by _Clostridium perfringens_. Officials say it is ""most likely"" that the gravy served was the source of the bacterium. They also noted that lapses in food safety practices were observed during their investigation.[Byline: Doug Powell]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[Unlike staphylococcal foodborne illness where the preformed toxin is ingested, in _C. perfringens_ disease, the enterotoxin is formed _in situ_ in the gastrointestinal tract. The following discussion is obtained from the FDA Bad Bug Book <http://www.fda.gov/food/foodborneillnesscontaminants/causesofillnessbadbugbook/ucm070483.htm>1. Name of the organism_Clostridium perfringens_ is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming rod. It is widely distributed in the environment and frequently occurs in the intestines of humans and many domestic and feral animals. Spores of the organism persist in soil, sediments, and areas subject to human or animal fecal pollution.2. Nature of acute diseasePerfringens food poisoning is the term used to describe the common foodborne illness caused by _C. perfringens_. A more serious but rare illness is also caused by ingesting food contaminated with type C strains. The latter illness is known as enteritis necroticans or pig-bel disease.3. Nature of diseaseThe common form of perfringens poisoning is characterized by intense abdominal cramps and diarrhea, which begin 8-22 hours after consumption of foods containing large numbers of those _C. perfringens_ bacteria capable of producing the food poisoning toxin. The illness is usually over within 24 hours, but less severe symptoms may persist in some individuals for 1-2 weeks. A few deaths have been reported as a result of dehydration and other complications.Necrotic enteritis (pig-bel) caused by _C. perfringens_ is often fatal. This disease also begins as a result of ingesting large numbers of the causative bacteria in contaminated foods. Deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA.Infective dose: The symptoms are caused by ingestion of large numbers (greater than 100 0000 000) vegetative cells. Toxin production in the digestive tract (or in test tubes) is associated with sporulation. This disease is a food infection; only one episode has ever implied the possibility of intoxication (that is, disease from preformed toxin).4. Diagnosis of human illnessPerfringens poisoning is diagnosed by its symptoms and the typical delayed onset of illness. Diagnosis is confirmed by detecting the toxin in the feces of patients. Bacteriological confirmation can also be done by finding exceptionally large numbers of the causative bacteria in implicated foods or in the feces of patients.5. Associated foodsIn most instances, the actual cause of poisoning by _C. perfringens_ is temperature abuse of prepared foods. Small numbers of the organisms are often present after cooking and multiply to food poisoning levels during cool down and storage of prepared foods. Meats, meat products, and gravy are the foods most frequently implicated.6. Relative frequency of diseasePerfringens poisoning is one of the most commonly reported foodborne illnesses in the USA. There were 1162 cases in 1981, in 28 separate outbreaks. At least 10-20 outbreaks have been reported annually in the USA for the past 2 decades. Typically, dozens or even hundreds of person are affected. It is probable that many outbreaks go unreported because the implicated foods or patient feces are not tested routinely for _C. perfringens_ or its toxin. CDC estimates that about 10 000 actual cases occur annually in the USA.7. Course of disease and complicationsThe disease generally lasts 24 hours. In the elderly or infirm, symptoms may last 1-2 weeks. Complications and/or death only very rarely occur.8. Target populationsInstitutional feeding (such as school cafeterias, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, etc.) where large quantities of food are prepared several hours before serving is the most common circumstance in which perfringens poisoning occurs. The young and elderly are the most frequent victims of perfringens poisoning. Except in the case of pig-bel syndrome, complications are few in persons under 30 years of age. Elderly persons are more likely to experience prolonged or severe symptoms.9. Food analysisStandard bacteriological culturing procedures are used to detect the organism in implicated foods and in feces of patients. Serological assays are used for detecting enterotoxin in the feces of patients and for testing the ability of strains to produce toxin. The procedures take 1-3 days.The following report from The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI, <http://www.upi.com/Health_News/2014/04/09/Food-poisoning-more-likely-at-a-US-restaurant-than-at-home/6551396980766/#ixzz2ygmRRRx9>) would suggest that foodborne illness is more commonly related to restaurant food than that made at home. Certainly such commercially-linked outbreaks are more commonly reported, perhaps because the possibility of litigation and substantial financial rewards bring out the best in reporting by individuals, in part spurred on by the myriad of outbreak (with or without an ambulance) -chasing law firms or website ""fronts"" for these firms such as the Food Poison Journal and the Food Poisoning Bulletin:""Outbreak data for food poisoning -- botulism, salmonellosis, _ E. coli_ O157:H7, hepatitis A or listeriosis -- indicate Americans are twice as likely to get sick from food prepared at a restaurant than food prepared at home. The Center for Science in the Public Interest, a Washington non-profit group, said it analyzed ""solved"" outbreaks -- in which investigators determined that a food and a pathogen caused the illness -- of foodborne illness over a 10-year period. The group found more than 1610 outbreaks in restaurants sickened more than 28 000 people, while 893 outbreaks linked to private homes caused nearly 13 000 cases of foodborne illnesses. CSPI's Outbreak Alert! database includes 7461 outbreaks of foodborne illness from 1990 to 2011 that sickened 98 399 people.Federal health officials at CDC estimate that each year, roughly one in 6 Americans -- or 48 million people -- get sick, 128 000 are hospitalized, and 3000 die due to foodborne diseases.Although the meat-related foodborne outbreaks such as the [1993] Jack in the Box [restaurant] ground beef _E. coli_ outbreak might get the most headlines, fresh produce, seafood, and packaged foods were responsible for more than twice as many solved outbreaks as meat and poultry products.Caroline Smith DeWaal, CSPI food safety director, said the group also documented decreased reporting of foodborne illness outbreaks. 42 percent or fewer outbreaks were reported by the states to the CDC, but fewer reported outbreaks doesn't mean fewer getting sick.""The Great Recession, influenza pandemics, and post-""9/11"" 2001 bioterrorism investments all diverted state public health budgets and attention away from foodborne outbreaks,"" DeWaal said. ""Underreporting of outbreaks has reached epidemic proportions, yet the details gleaned from outbreak investigations provide essential information so public health officials can shape food safety policy and make science-based recommendations to consumers."" - Mod.LLA HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6813>.]
