Today [edited]<https://www.today.ng/news/nigeria/236195/nigeria-records-273-lassa-fever-cases-149-deaths-201516-ncdc>The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control on Friday [23 Dec 2016] said Nigeria recorded the largest outbreaks of Lassa fever in its history between 2015 and 2016, with 273 reported cases resulting in 149 deaths. Dr. Chikwe Ihekweazu, the Chief Executive Officer of NCDC, said this in a statement in Lagos. Ihekweazu said the cases were reported from 23 states.He said that, following this, the Minister of Health inaugurated a Lassa Fever Eradication Committee under the leadership of Prof. Oyewale Tomori. It said that the committee was to look into the situation and offer solutions to the NCDC towards preventing future outbreaks and reducing deaths from the disease.According to Ihekweazu, the committee came up with an approach that focused on strengthening the capacities and capabilities of states to prevent, detect and respond to Lassa while the NCDC coordinates the efforts.The statement said: ""The prepositioning of commodities has now ensured that all 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory in Nigeria have a full complement of emergency materials. The materials comprised personal protection equipment [PPE], Ribavirin, disinfection sprayers, hand sanitizers, hypochlorite (bleach), case definition posters, hard copies of IDSR technical guidelines and safety boxes.""The statement said that NCDC had dispatched a team of epidemiologists to support Ogun State to respond to the recent outbreak where a case of Lassa fever was confirmed in a healthcare worker, who died later at the Federal Medical Centre, Abeokuta. It stated: ""Emergency Operations Centre has been setup and is now monitoring all contacts of the case, disinfecting contaminated areas and coordinating all response activities. This case highlights the risk Lassa fever still poses to the lives of Nigerians, particularly at this time of the year.""The statement said that a nationwide risk communications plan had also been developed. Ihekweazu said: ""Throughout the dry season, a new communication plan would address priority antecedents of Lassa fever outbreaks to ensure prevention is guaranteed.""He said the communication targeted all key stakeholders, from presidency to households, and would emphasise the ways to prevent Lassa fever infection. He said: ""The Lassa virus is transmitted to humans via contact with food or household items contaminated with infected rodent urine or faeces. Lassa can also be transmitted from human to human through contact with the body fluids of an infected person. The key messages to Nigerians are, firstly protect your food items from access by rats using whatever means that you can afford; refrigerate, cover, store properly. Secondly if you do have a fever, insist on getting tested for malaria using a rapid diagnostic test, remembering that not every fever is malaria. ""No healthcare worker can diagnose malaria without a test, and it is the right of every Nigerian to demand a test.""He urged healthcare workers to always apply standard infection prevention and control precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis, as the healthcare setting could be particularly risky.--Communicated by:ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts<promed@promedmail.org>[With Lassa fever being reported from 23 states in Nigeria, it is good to see its diagnosis, treatment and prevention being tackled on a national basis. Presumably, eradication relates to occurrence of human cases.The virus is endemic in multimammate rodents (_Mastomys_ spp.). Although reduction of populations of these rodents in and around human habitations is possible, their eradication and elimination of the virus is not. The committee is making valuable recommendations that should contribute to the reduction of human cases both in and outside health centers. Public education will be essential for implementation of safe rodent control measures and for eliminating contamination of food materials by these rodents. Availability of PPE in health care centers will eliminate nosocomial transmission but only if that equipment is properly used. Training of health care personnel in its use, and subsequent routine practice, will be essential.Interestingly, the previous ProMED-mail post (archive no. 20161221.4713167) of suspected Lassa fever cases in Ogun state included a request for information about confirmation, or not, of the etiology of these cases. The response of EpiCore participants in Nigeria was swift and gratifying. To date, 17 responses have been received confirming the cases as Lassa fever, an illustration of the effectiveness of the EpiCore system in Nigeria. ProMED-mail thanks these respondents.Images of _Mastomys_ mice can be seen at <http://www.ispot.org.za/node/255877>.Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at <http://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/map/profile/nigeria.pdf> and <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/46358>. - Mod.TY]
