Forsyth News [edited]<http://www.forsythnews.com/section/1/article/31792/>Health officials are warning the public to be careful as a Forsyth County resident is recovering after being bitten by a kitten with rabies.Georgia Department of Public Health District 2, which serves northeast Georgia, sent out information after the cat was found in the area of Atlanta Highway (Hwy. 9) and McFarland Parkway. The animal was confirmed to have the disease by a local veterinarian.Details on the person or his or her condition were not immediately available.In a news release, officials said feral cats, or those born in the wild, should not be treated like pets.""Feral cats, unlike stray domesticated cats, are born in the wild and should be treated as wild animals,"" the release said. ""Do not attempt to capture or feed feral cats. Leave them alone. If you feed your pets outside, pick up any uneaten food so wild animals, including feral cats, will not be attracted to your property.""The occurrence of rabies in people has declined in recent years, but residents should take steps to keep their pets safe, including keeping them away from wild animals and making sure their shots are up to date. Pet owners should also not let pets roam.Wildlife is the most common way for rabies to spread, and, locally, there are traps in the area where the rabid cat was captured to secure other cats that might have the disease.According to the release, the disease can only be spread by bites, but treatments are available.""Rabies is transmitted only when the virus is introduced into bite wounds, open cuts in the skin, or onto mucous membranes, such as the eyes or mouth. The virus enters the central nervous system of the host causing an inflammation of the brain that is almost always fatal,"" the release said.""Exposure to rabies is treatable by prompt care to the wound and appropriate post-exposure medicines. Prompt medical attention is very important, however, as rabies is almost always fatal without it.""The most commonly infected animals are raccoons, skunks, coyotes, foxes and bats, while small rodents like squirrels, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, chipmunks, rats, mice, rabbits and hares ""are almost never found to be infected with rabies.""The department recommends calling animal control if a stray animal is found.The Forsyth County Sheriff's Office said that if animals show signs of the disease, like mouth foaming or strange behavior, to call 911 or their non-emergency number.More information about feral cats can be found at Feralcatprogramofgeorgia.com, and information on rabies can be found at Dph.georgia.gov/rabies.[Byline: Kelly Whitmire]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>******[2] California, cat, human exposureDate: 19 Dec 2016Source: Sacramento Bee [edited]<http://www.sacbee.com/enterta inment/living/pets/article1217 37573.html>A dead cat in Fair Oaks tested positive for the rabies virus, prompting health officials to warn area pet owners to be on the lookout for changes in their animals.The Sacramento County Division of Public Health advised residents near Minnesota Avenue, between Sunset Avenue and Woodglen Drive, to call county public health offices if they came into contact with a sickly gray and black tabby between 26 Nov and 2 Dec 2016.The cat died and tested positive for rabies at the public health laboratory.Officials asked residents to make sure their pet vaccinations are up to date. They also recommend that pet owners monitor their dogs and cats for signs of rabies, such as lethargy, aggressiveness, other changes in behavior and trouble walking.Rabies infects the central nervous system. The most common way rabies is transmitted is through a bite in which the virus-containing saliva is transmitted from the host animal.""We have been in communication with those identified as having direct contact with the animal,"" said Dr. Olivia Kasirye, Sacramento County's public health officer. ""We want other residents in the neighborhood to be aware in case they came into contact with the cat and to remind people of the importance of vaccinating their pets.""[Byline: Bill Lindelof]--Communicated by:ProMED-mail<promed@promedmail.org>[Rabies does not always manifest itself as a furious animal foaming at the mouth. The dumb kind of rabies results in a quiet, withdrawn animal. This behavior is usually out of the ordinary. An animal that is normally active and runs away may be sitting quietly awaiting a friendly pat on the head. So, any behavior out of the ordinary for any animal should raise concern.Your pets should be vaccinated regularly. Rabies vaccines are good for either one or 3 years depending on the type of vaccine used. If you have horses or show cattle or goats or sheep, it is important to vaccinate them as well. Farm animals are just as capable of coming into contact with another rabid animal and then attacking their owner because they acquired the disease. When large animals such as horses or cattle become rabid, they may attack their human handlers, and the consequences can be quite bad.Neither of these communities suggested having a rabies drive to ensure pets are vaccinated or indicated that they had public service announcements regarding the seriousness of rabies and where to get an animal vaccinated. If this was being done, it is certainly not mentioned in the articles.If you have been bitten by an animal, get medical treatment. Post exposure prophylaxis needs to be given within a limited amount of time from the bite. - Mod.TGProMED HealthMaps:Georgia: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/213>California: <http://healthmap.org/promed/p/204>]
